[Amit Varma]: Among the many things we take for granted, there is money. We behave as if the system
[Amit Varma]: of money around us has always been there, as if it's as natural as the oxygen in the
[Amit Varma]: air. We behave as if a rupee tomorrow will be worth the same as a rupee today. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: we behave as if the financial system around us is stable and immutable, taking it for
[Amit Varma]: granted in the same way that we take the circulatory system of our body for granted. We don't think
[Amit Varma]: about our heart ceaselessly pumping blood until there is a problem with it. And when
[Unknown]: there is, that problem can become life-threatening.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen. My subject for today is our ongoing banking crisis and
[Amit Varma]: my guest is Tamal Bandopadhyay, author of the superb book, Pandemonium, The Great Indian
[Amit Varma]: Banking Tragedy. India has been in a financial crisis for a while now, our banking system
[Amit Varma]: is damaged, we have an NPA problem and this whole mess is a structural issue beyond any
[Amit Varma]: specific political party or government. I've done many episodes on different aspects of
[Amit Varma]: this and they'll all be linked from the show notes. And if you care about this subject,
[Amit Varma]: you must read Pandemonium. Tamal is India's most highly regarded banking columnist. He
[Amit Varma]: was part of the founding team of the newspaper Mint. He has held senior editorial positions
[Amit Varma]: in various newspapers and he's written a number of exceptional books. Pandemonium is particularly
[Amit Varma]: enjoyable because it's like many books in one. It features riveting storytelling with
[Amit Varma]: colourful tales of wild frauds and evocative scenes from Arthur Road Jail. It features
[Amit Varma]: incisive analysis in simple language that will make you feel like an expert at the end
[Amit Varma]: of the book. It features long interviews with four ex-central bankers C. Rangarajan, Y.
[Amit Varma]: V. Reddy, D. Subbarao and Raghuram Rajan, which alone are worth the price of the book
[Amit Varma]: for their insights and their self-aware criticism. I was delighted when Tamal joined me on the
[Amit Varma]: scene and the unseen. And for me, honestly, the most rewarding part of this conversation
[Amit Varma]: came before we even started talking about banking. Listen in and I'm sure you'll agree
[Amit Varma]: with me. But before we get to our conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Banks and monetary policy, and understanding of stock markets and personal investing and
[Amit Varma]: a demystification of interest rates, stock market bubbles and exchange rates. All of
[Amit Varma]: this is vital to understanding the modern world, as are so many other courses in this
[Amit Varma]: site, the Great Courses Plus has a fantastic library of online courses from subjects ranging
[Amit Varma]: from music, math, cooking, history, political theory and much else. They also have an app
[Amit Varma]: where you can listen to the audio of these courses the same way you're listening to this
[Amit Varma]: podcast now and it will cost you nothing. You get one month of unlimited free access
[Amit Varma]: if you use the following URL, thegreatcoursesplus.com slash unseen. That's right, unseen,
[Amit Varma]: thegreatcoursesplus.com slash unseen for one month of unlimited free access. What a deal.
[Guest]: Tomal, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thanks, Amit. I mean, I'm a bit nervous,
[Amit Varma]: but anyway. Why would you be nervous? We've lived for the last few months with the fear of this
[Amit Varma]: virus. So why would one worry about a mere podcast? You know, there's a lot I want to talk
[Amit Varma]: with you about and I've been looking forward to this. But before we start, tell me how have the
[Amit Varma]: last few months been for you? Like, how have you managed during COVID? Yeah, it's not an easy thing
[Guest]: because I'm a person who travel a lot. I mean, probably 15 days a month, if not more, not
[Guest]: overseas, primarily within India and a bit of overseas once in a while. So that's the kind of
[Guest]: lifestyle I have been maintaining for the last five years, I would say. Yeah, 2014, five, six
[Guest]: years when I left my regular job. So for a person like me, suddenly confined at home, in the second
[Guest]: week of March 2020, I had my last trip just before the COVID started. And yeah, it is pretty, pretty,
[Guest]: I mean, one problem was being confined at home. And you know, Mumbai homes are not large, you
[Guest]: don't have garden, you don't have a lot of other luxury, which you could afford probably in some
[Guest]: parts of Delhi and other metros. At home, me, my wife and a dog, pet. One concern, son is overseas,
[Guest]: US and US scenario is pretty bad. He's doing his PhD in economics. So that's the worry being a
[Guest]: parent was there. And claustrophobia within this, no, and most of the time, I was confined into my
[Guest]: studies, which is a very small place. But on the positive side, I could because of the COVID,
[Guest]: I could finish my latest book in record time. So I probably walked 16 hours a day. Because
[Guest]: most of the traveling conversation, everything is over by March. So it was to be written. And
[Guest]: trust you me 1,50,000 word plus, I pulled out within this between March end and yeah, August,
[Guest]: March, April, May, June, July, six months. So that's the good part of it. Bad part of is the
[Guest]: confinement, claustrophobia. And the other part, which is very surreal, you know, I have been
[Guest]: living in Mumbai with a very small break for a few years from it's 35 years from 1985. I have never
[Guest]: seen this Mumbai because you know, I had to take my dog out for a walk. So every day that was the
[Guest]: ritual morning ritual for my wife and evening for me. And I saw I mean, I don't know because of my
[Guest]: age probably some days I was in tears. I found crows dead bodies of crows pigeons on the streets,
[Guest]: probably they were not been able to eat. That's what they're they're dying. And when as things
[Guest]: were slightly getting better after two or three months of after the pure play lockdown when it's
[Guest]: when it started slightly opening up. I found the kids which were essentially earlier used to sell
[Guest]: balloons on other toys and all they turned bigger. And they are not asking for money. They were just
[Guest]: pulling my shirt or t shirt or pajama and pointing out some bread or milk pouch uncle you buy this
[Guest]: for me. You know, I have never seen this in my life in Bombay when we heard about post partition
[Guest]: what happened from our parents and all. So I mean, it was I was in tears and one particular
[Guest]: person, you know, in Bandra there's a park where one person I used to find that every day he was
[Guest]: covered in his face with a bed cover or something that lying there under a tree. I'm talking about
[Guest]: March, April, May. And suddenly I found that I used to take my dog out in that park. Even the
[Guest]: dog is not allowed. But those days, you know, we used to take him. And then suddenly one fine day
[Guest]: evening I found that gentleman was he was singing song classical music and baritone voice. I was
[Guest]: very impressed that gentleman. And the next day I found him that he was bowling. There was a wicket
[Guest]: he fixed up and there are multiple balls he was trying to bowl. And my dog picked up one of the
[Guest]: balls and he's he always steals balls whenever we find. So then this person spoke in just English.
[Guest]: Hang on, hang on, uncle. Don't worry. Let him have a ball. I have many walls. Then I got curious. I
[Guest]: said, Who are you, etc, etc. I found that he was a law student. But and he was a classical student.
[Guest]: He was a classical singer as a student of that particular Gharana. But his hostel is he was
[Guest]: staying in Juhu. His hostel asked him not to be there. So he he came out of this. He didn't know
[Guest]: where to go. He managed some for night sleep at a church somewhere. And during the day, he was in
[Guest]: the park from from 8 to 8 12 hours. He was just lying down there. I said, Can I do anything for
[Guest]: you? I mean, in terms of because it's pretty, pretty close from my house. He said, No, I don't
[Guest]: need anything. What I need you can't give me because food is I'm getting food, free food.
[Guest]: I need a place to stay. But you can't give me that you can give me a place. So there's only
[Guest]: one story. I don't want to continue for long. So there are many things which actually, you know,
[Guest]: I don't know, I found it. It's very surreal. I declare I refuse to believe it that something
[Guest]: can happen. I used to take my car out. Once in a while in the evening, there's a press sticker on
[Guest]: my car. So despite being interrogated at various places and stopped, they did allow me but I used
[Guest]: to take the car out to get a feel different parts of Mumbai in the evening, maybe once a week.
[Guest]: And then I found that, you know, roads, I could not recognize which way to go because everything
[Guest]: is empty. So which would drive many a time I drove on the wrong lane. You know, and I found
[Guest]: those kind of beggars who were not asking for money, but asking for bread and milk and something
[Guest]: else for other family members, etc. I found this gentleman. So it's it was very, very disturbing.
[Guest]: Very, very disturbing. I must say you need to really be strong to be yourself. Even after
[Amit Varma]: seeing all this. You mentioned that you'd heard, you know, similar stories coming from partition
[Amit Varma]: times from your parents as indeed I have as well. And here's a thought that strikes me and tell me
[Amit Varma]: what you think about it, which is that there is an invisible city out there that we don't see.
[Amit Varma]: And actually, there are two invisible cities. And one is the one that in normal times, we don't
[Amit Varma]: notice it because we have just sort of blocked it away. You know, it could be the beggar at the
[Amit Varma]: traffic signal or all the people we don't notice and who are invisible to us when we are out there.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe there's a lot of grief and stuff that we do not notice. And that's one kind of
[Amit Varma]: invisibility. And I think there's another sort of notional invisible city that comes about because
[Amit Varma]: many of these people live really precarious lives. And when you have one little crisis,
[Amit Varma]: one, it's not a little crisis, but even a little crisis can just push them over the edge into
[Amit Varma]: another existence, which is hovering over them all the time, but we don't see it till the crisis
[Amit Varma]: comes. Like you spoke about people, the kids who would sell balloons and all of that, and they're
[Amit Varma]: pointing to a kind of packet of bread. So, you know, do you feel there's something to this and
[Amit Varma]: after sort of this experience, like after the last few months, do you feel you are a changed person
[Guest]: in some way, in the way that you look at the world? Yes, absolutely. I mean, I'm getting very
[Guest]: emotional, but I do feel, as I said, it's very surreal. So my parents are not from East Bengal,
[Guest]: so they don't have the firsthand experience of this. But I heard from them what happened,
[Guest]: we read about it. And I'm talking about what I experienced, what I have seen on television
[Guest]: channels or read in newspapers, I'm not talking about that. I'm not talking about the migrant
[Guest]: crisis and other, you know, those schemes. But what I saw in Mumbai, in the western suburb of
[Guest]: Bandra, where many, many years I've been living, my first day in Mumbai was in Bandra. And the
[Guest]: past 35 years, as I said, barring an interval at many of the lanes I have seen in Bandra and the
[Guest]: sea face, it's very familiar with me. I've never seen this. So I don't know whether this is all
[Guest]: along been there. And it was because of COVID, it just, you know, spilled over to our, I would say,
[Guest]: in their consciousness, it was in the subconscious, I mean, I'm talking about philosophically,
[Guest]: or it's been there, we don't notice because there are people, you know, at the traffic signals,
[Guest]: there's balloon malas, or, you know, somebody selling a box of figs, or the books, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Actually, they lead this kind of life. And because of COVID, that life, the wave of their life just
[Guest]: got into our seashore. I don't know, but it is very difficult. You know, there have been occasions
[Guest]: where somebody just got hold of me, at least there are twice it happened, two persons got hold of me
[Guest]: on my left wrist, and it's very strong thing and asking for something he said, I have not eaten,
[Guest]: you have to get something for me. And in one case, I got little paranoid that easier sort of
[Guest]: will he like, use his dagger or something and kill me. In a gully, he put me there within Bandra.
[Guest]: And then he said, in English, he said, you come on, don't get nervous, you come on. And then in
[Guest]: within the gully, etc, he took me to a biryani stall. There are other biryani stalls also on
[Guest]: the road, but this biryani stall, I was not aware of it. And it is better than the other biryanis.
[Guest]: And he said, Can you buy a biryani for me? So 150 rupees I paid, and I got a biryani from there.
[Guest]: So I have never seen you know, I would not call them aggressive. You know, it's not aggression.
[Guest]: It is just like you, you hold on to a straw when you are drowning. So he was making a last
[Guest]: date attempt just probably he has not eaten for a few days. That here is a man with his dog,
[Guest]: probably well off, he can afford why not. So I didn't have the money. So I, I told the
[Guest]: biryani seller, this is my mobile number, you check it out. I'll come back and pay you the money.
[Guest]: So that's how it happened. So yes, my my approach to life has changed. Now, how long it will last,
[Guest]: I don't know. Like for instance, many years back, I went to a yoga ashram and stayed for 10 days.
[Guest]: And next three months, I was a little different person. I used to get up pretty early,
[Guest]: and seeing things in a different way. I'm not comparing that. But then, as I got into the
[Guest]: normal routine life, no, it started wearing off. So will this COVID impact also a year or two down
[Guest]: the line will wear off and I will become the same old person? Or will it forever stay with me? I do
[Guest]: not know. But as we speak, definitely, I am not the same person which who was had you spoken to
[Guest]: me one year before, my approach to life things surrounding me, definitely different than what
[Amit Varma]: I am today. And another sort of thought which strikes me, which is also a surreal aspect,
[Amit Varma]: since you mentioned that word, is that on the one hand, you're going out walking your dog,
[Amit Varma]: and you're going driving, and you're seeing all these things, which, you know, one would not
[Amit Varma]: otherwise notice or one would, or it would otherwise not be like this. At the same time,
[Amit Varma]: you're writing a book, which is about just another kind of reality there. And the thing is,
[Amit Varma]: I often find it hard as a writer on these subjects on economics of public policy,
[Amit Varma]: to really drive home that connection where I say that, listen, bad economics has humanitarian
[Amit Varma]: consequences, that all of these things are related. And in your book, you've written about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there are so many concepts in your book. And all of those concepts, in a way,
[Amit Varma]: play back to this reality that you're seeing on the streets. But that connection can sometimes
[Amit Varma]: be hard to make. And of course, the real people that you write about in your book, you know,
[Amit Varma]: including the Nirav Modi's and the Vijay Mallya's and all of that are just at a different sort of
[Amit Varma]: level. Is that connection something that even you have to keep reminding yourself of the real
[Amit Varma]: consequences of some of these bad policies that you're writing about, that this is not happening
[Amit Varma]: in some artificial universe, all the things happening in banking, but they have a real impact?
[Guest]: Honestly, no, no, I don't have that kind of, you call it, I don't have the missionary zeal of,
[Guest]: you know, telling the world, look, this is, underneath is this, it's not like that. As an
[Guest]: author, I always want to tell a story. And now my last book, which you mentioned this pandemonium
[Guest]: is different because it is a much larger canvas, the pandemonium, what we have been witnessing in
[Guest]: Indian banking system. Earlier, this is my six books, earlier five books, primarily one was
[Guest]: a collection of essays, which and the rest four was sort of biographical on institutions, good,
[Guest]: bad, ugly, on shadow banking, on India's finest bank, on a microfinance entity, etc.
[Guest]: Now, this time, it's very different because the canvas was very large. There are constituents
[Guest]: where many and I tried to take a deep dive kind of thing, what has gone wrong? And how and why
[Guest]: and what the basic W principles of journalism. But I not consciously or unconsciously,
[Guest]: I have been trying to relate that and the real world. And we are paying the price for being,
[Guest]: you know, not following the governance, etc. in that the world of economics and finance not.
[Guest]: As an author, my simple logic is I want to tell a story. And my advantage is probably I'm
[Guest]: fairly illiterate about finance and economics, because I don't have any kind of background.
[Guest]: Once you have that background, then you go through that prism, you know, that theory,
[Guest]: I have read this and this Nobel laureate has said that and somebody has said that or not,
[Guest]: and I don't go through that. I don't have that baggage of knowledge, if I may put it so,
[Guest]: you know, so I am like a mountaineer. I know that I need to carry minimum things,
[Guest]: only the oxygen cylinder and a bit of chocolate and those kind of things. And then what I see,
[Guest]: what I feel, that's all. So no, I do connect the micro and macro. I do try to read between the
[Guest]: lines. But my overarching ambition and the mission is to tell a story. And that story should be read
[Guest]: by everybody. If I say it must be read by your aunt, and she should appreciate you, you will
[Guest]: hang me for my gender bias. So let me say your teenage boy would be able to read and understand.
[Guest]: So that's the overarching philosophy for every book I follow. And this book also same thing,
[Amit Varma]: just telling a story. That's actually what you said about your aunt or an eight-year-old boy
[Amit Varma]: is very resonant with me because I teach an online course, where one of my slides is about
[Amit Varma]: what I call the Naniji test, where I say that if you're writing an op-ed or an article,
[Amit Varma]: show it to your Naniji or a young teenager. And if they don't read it all the way through,
[Amit Varma]: you're doing something wrong. It's your fault. It's not their fault. And obviously,
[Amit Varma]: I'm not condescending to either Nanijis or teenagers. But the idea is that an intelligent
[Amit Varma]: layperson should be able to understand it. And I think this test also helps you avoid what people
[Amit Varma]: call the curse of knowledge or what you call the baggage of too much knowledge in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, before we sort of get back to where you started and all of that, which I want to get
[Amit Varma]: to a related question on this point, that strikes me, which is that another thing I say in my
[Amit Varma]: writing class and with George Orwell as well used to wrote about in a famous essay called
[Amit Varma]: politics in the English language is that the pressure to write clearly makes you think clearly,
[Amit Varma]: makes you think deeper, because it's actually quite easy to write about something using jargon
[Amit Varma]: and obfuscatory language and abstract concepts. But when you put on yourself the pressure to
[Amit Varma]: write clearly in simple language that anyone can understand, then that means you have to
[Amit Varma]: understand the subject that much better and go to its root and all of that, which shines through in
[Amit Varma]: your writing. I mean, this book was such a lovely read and a lovely piece of storytelling. And I'll
[Amit Varma]: come back to that as well. But is that something that you have found that because you have given
[Amit Varma]: yourself this mandate and not everybody in business papers or all the places where you work
[Amit Varma]: necessarily writes this much clearly, but because you are forcing yourself to ask basic questions,
[Amit Varma]: not worrying about looking stupid, to ask simple questions and to, you know, simplify it for the
[Amit Varma]: reader. Do you feel that that's also helped your knowledge of whatever it is you're writing about?
[Guest]: Absolutely. I mean, you have hit the nail. I think, as I said, my advantage is I don't have
[Guest]: the background necessary to be a finance writer. But that actually encourages me to ask stupid
[Guest]: questions, where I don't know. So there are a few principles which I follow while writing my column,
[Guest]: writing used to those days news reports, when I was a reporter, and now a column and books.
[Guest]: If my writing is only appreciated by the bankers and the community of the financial sector people,
[Guest]: then I'm a complete failure. People of other professions should read, the teachers, the
[Guest]: doctors, the students should read and appreciate. So I must have a much larger base of people. So
[Guest]: that's one part. Second part is the element of storytelling that remains also in my column also,
[Guest]: you know, that connecting the dots, the connecting micro and macro, those are the kind of stuff.
[Guest]: And third, the most, it is by default, probably I do this, because as I said, I don't know.
[Guest]: Basic thing is this, most of the subjects I just don't know. So what I ask stupid questions,
[Guest]: I end up reading a lot of things. And then I'm not embarrassed to ask whether it's RBI governor or
[Guest]: finance ministry officials, bureaucrats or bankers.
[Guest]: Boss, just explain to me, I don't understand. Can you please explain to me? And they are kind
[Guest]: enough because they also probably take pity on me that this person is trying to understand why not.
[Guest]: So I actually they play the role of teachers at various stage of my career. I've got various
[Guest]: people who have been continuously playing the role of teacher or interpreter, whatever you call it.
[Guest]: So explaining things even today as we speak on anything, I have multiple people at different
[Guest]: India and overseas, I can reach out and I just say that and they're all eminent people,
[Guest]: very knowledgeable people and they have the fundamental background of economics and finance.
[Guest]: I just tell them just can you explain to me why? And till such time, I am convinced I don't want
[Guest]: to write it. So that's all. If something happened, Reserve Bank of India cut rate or has raised rates
[Guest]: or something else happened, what does it mean for me? I mean, only by saying this,
[Guest]: it doesn't make any sense. It starts from there. And then as I said, however difficult the subject
[Guest]: is, and even the easiest subject also I can't understand. This is not my modesty. This is just
[Guest]: because I don't have the background, right kind of background and things are evolving in particularly
[Guest]: in finance. Just to be there, you need to run, you know, because globally things are happening
[Guest]: so fast. So I have multiple teachers at multiple geographies for multiple subjects. And I am not
[Guest]: embarrassed to expose myself. I tell them that look, please explain to me. And which is why
[Guest]: probably an intelligent person and a person with a background, probably what would take one hour,
[Guest]: I may end up taking four hours, four times more. But that's the price you pay.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's, that's very inspiring. And I'm going to take a brief digression for my listeners and
[Amit Varma]: point out that, you know, while Tamal has said that he doesn't write for the banking community
[Amit Varma]: only, and he wants everyone to read him. The fact of the matter is that all the journalists
[Amit Varma]: that I have spoken to that, you know, who have ever mentioned you in conversation,
[Amit Varma]: and all the bankers whom I've heard talking about you have nothing but the highest respect for your
[Amit Varma]: work, you know, which is a tribute both to clear writing and intellectual humility. However, now
[Amit Varma]: turning back to Tamal, I've got to tell you that in today's episode, you are going to be on the
[Amit Varma]: receiving end of stupid questions. Because this is a subject which I'm treating you as the expert
[Amit Varma]: in and I am going to ask a bunch of simple questions and get you to simplify it. But you
[Amit Varma]: know, before we get to the subject, I'd like to know a little bit more about you. One of the
[Amit Varma]: things that I was fascinated by at the start of the book is when you mentioned where the title of
[Amit Varma]: Pandemonium comes from, which of course comes from Milton's Paradise Lost. And then I looked you up
[Amit Varma]: a bit more and I realized that you have a master's degree in English literature from Calcutta
[Amit Varma]: University. You enjoy reading a lot. And in fact, throughout your book, there are other references
[Amit Varma]: that you know, show that you don't fit the stereotype of a financial journalist whose
[Amit Varma]: head is in finance all the time. You are imbibing culture, whether it's music or writing and all of
[Amit Varma]: that in different ways. So tell me a bit about, you know, what kind of a young person were you
[Amit Varma]: growing up? What were your influences? What did you want to be? You know, obviously, a significant
[Amit Varma]: part of your love of storytelling comes from, I presume, comes from your love of literature.
[Amit Varma]: But so tell me a bit about, you know, you before you become a financial journalist.
[Guest]: Well, you'll be pretty disappointed, actually. I don't have any interesting background.
[Guest]: I come from a mufasal town, which is 110 kilometers away from Kolkata, a place called
[Guest]: Medinipur, they call it, Midnapur under the British regime, where that Khudiram, the martyr,
[Guest]: etc, etc was there. And from a, yeah, I mean, it'll be a charitable way of calling ourself a
[Guest]: middle class family because we could eat rice both the times because those days I'm talking
[Guest]: about 60s. My uncle's family used to eat chapati at night because they couldn't afford rice was
[Guest]: more expensive than atta. We had rice both the occasions and not every Sundays, but some Sundays
[Guest]: mutton curry, being all a typical thing and focus on studies. That was the kind of stuff there.
[Guest]: This we used to sit on the floor and eat our dinner. And we used to talk about cricket,
[Guest]: cricket, Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi was the, I think, India's captain there and multiple other
[Guest]: things. So it is a very, and there is no, what you read, no, the middle class Bengalis will be
[Guest]: on every summer vacation. They will take a long distance train and go on a holiday and buy books
[Guest]: from wheeler stalls. It is not like that. I was the youngest. And by the time I was in high school,
[Guest]: my father retired. So, and I was of the four, the youngest one. So I was never pampered. Typically,
[Guest]: a youngest child is pampered. I was never pampered. Yeah, that was the thing I was not.
[Guest]: But yeah, there was passion to read. One of the ways of reading is, you know, was those days in
[Guest]: West Bengal, there's a lot of cultural competition. So the so-called extracurricular activities
[Guest]: and used to get prizes books, we can't afford to buy books, even for my regular school books,
[Guest]: we never got new books, we could not buy because financial and not that, as I said, that scenario.
[Guest]: I was not exactly a brilliant, brilliant student, but I managed free school, free students,
[Guest]: both college, school, etc. So one of the ways of getting those books to read, which you'd like to
[Guest]: read is to get into the competition and win the awards. So that's sort of a very, very, I think,
[Guest]: from probably age of five or six or seven, I started doing that, which is recitation, eloquence,
[Guest]: debate, essay writing, writing poems, short stories, even drama. You know, I started acting
[Guest]: at a very young age, then directing also. And all along in my school, college, university,
[Guest]: I was the cultural blue, getting all the awards, not in music, but that. So that was one side of
[Guest]: it. And so that opens a door. And that also makes you sort of independent, I would say not
[Guest]: what you want to do, you want to do not others, what they are doing it. But those days, when you
[Guest]: study English literature, and not an extraordinarily brilliant career, there are options to one is you
[Guest]: become the big go for civil service, or you go for teaching. That was the standard thing.
[Guest]: I was also toying with those kinds of ideas. And then, and then a series of accidents started.
[Guest]: In a sense, somebody saw Times of India ad looking for apprentice journalists,
[Guest]: trainee journalists, through a series of tests, etc, one could go there. So somebody saw the
[Guest]: advertisement in Statesman, and said, Why don't you apply and try that. So we had some tests,
[Guest]: etc, etc, the final tests in Mumbai, and coming to Mumbai by Gitanjali 32 hours, I had nobody in
[Guest]: Bombay, I got out of the VT station from the end where that GPO and then I had I remember I had a
[Guest]: Bata Northstar shoe, a brown color, I got it polished. And with a smartness, I got into a
[Guest]: taxi to take me to Times of India, which was a one minute walk just across the road. And the taxi guy
[Guest]: looked at me. And then he took me to the Reserve Bank of India. So it buggers thing, Mark turn,
[Guest]: turn right, and then came back on the DN road and dropped me at the Times of India.
[Guest]: I gave my tests, etc. And then to cut a long story short, I got in there. So it's purely by
[Guest]: by accident, I became a journalist, I saw all these guys on typewriter facing the wall and
[Guest]: doing I thought, Oh God, it's all the full of typewriters. Where are the journalists?
[Guest]: That's how I came. And then a few years I were there doing writing stories, book reviews,
[Guest]: film reviews, alcoholic anonymous and narcotic anonymous, nothing to do with finance.
[Guest]: So first accident becoming a journalist second as a real accident. My father had an accident,
[Guest]: which was pretty fatal. He did survive for a few years. And then I took a call that I must go back
[Guest]: to Kolkata. And but Kolkata Times of India did not have any kind of vacancy. So I was put in
[Guest]: Economic Times desk. And that's how I was introduced to steel and tea. And you know,
[Guest]: those are the kind of things jute in Kolkata. Those are the kind of stuff. I didn't like it
[Guest]: much. I was not enjoying. So I was writing Illustrated Weekly because so little money
[Guest]: you get to survive you, you need to do a little more. And one of the ways was writing and
[Guest]: Illustrated Weekly already I started writing in Bombay. So I used to, I was married, but hardly
[Guest]: at home. I was doing night shifts in office. And during daytime, I was all over West Bengal
[Guest]: doing stories for Illustrated Weekly. So that's how and then by then I from shifted to cut a long
[Guest]: story short into another paper. And they put me into feature writing. And then they asked me into
[Guest]: writing of those days, trade unions were very active in West Bengal. So why don't you try
[Guest]: trade union and through trade union made I think 94 I smell banking because the two biggest trade
[Guest]: unions AIBA for employees and AIBOC for officers, both were in Kolkata, and they are very powerful.
[Guest]: I still remember Tarakeshwar Chakraborty was the AIBA General Secretary on his table,
[Guest]: there are trophy which is Air India or Indian Airlines flight, because he used to spend the
[Guest]: maximum number of hours in a year in the sky. So he used to get that those days, no frequent
[Guest]: flyer, the whatever the longest time in the sky, that kind of thing. And his people are there
[Guest]: everywhere in every bank. So and he used to share with me from his Godrej Almira, he will open up
[Guest]: all those, you know, papers and all. And as I said, I didn't understand. So I used to figure
[Guest]: out how to appreciate things, how to know things. That's how I was in mid 90s post liberalization,
[Guest]: and all the banking rules, etc, changing, I was introduced. And then I came back to Bombay.
[Guest]: That's how I got into banking. And then from a reporter. So every everything, as I said,
[Guest]: by accident, then from there into book writing also got into accident, somebody once the
[Guest]: publisher approached me, he wanted to get a book on something. And that's how I got in there.
[Guest]: And then now I am I have one foot in in the industry as an advisor, etc, with the entities,
[Guest]: again, like by accident. So nothing has been planned to answer your question that did I
[Guest]: actually prepare myself for this entire innings? No, I just gone into the flow. And I believe one
[Guest]: is, you must enjoy what you do. So I enjoy what I do. And then I find ways how to do it good.
[Guest]: How to do it good. And second part of is this, I think it sounds a cliche, but the actual learning
[Guest]: happens outside the classroom. So you said I am a student of English literature, that bearing is
[Guest]: there at the background, that helps me to understand things in a different way in the
[Guest]: context and all. But all the other things I just pick up as I move even today. So it may sound
[Guest]: little pseudo modesty that if I say I am a student, but I am a student and I mean it.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. There are many strands I'd like to pick up. But first of all, I should mention that
[Amit Varma]: I got a warm glow when you mentioned that thing about getting books as a prize, because
[Amit Varma]: my father who grew up in Calcutta and is 20 years older than you, he was born in 1941.
[Amit Varma]: And he's mentioned how during his students years, they would give books as prizes for everything.
[Amit Varma]: And he would try to just win books all the time. And I wonder if that's something
[Amit Varma]: kind of uniquely Bengali in the sense that immediately there is that appreciation of
[Amit Varma]: books and knowledge and all of that, which is kind of coming from there. And it also strikes
[Amit Varma]: me that something like that is not possible today, because books are so much more accessible,
[Amit Varma]: which is wonderful. But does that also mean that we value them less? I would hope not.
[Amit Varma]: But moving on to sort of your growing up years again, before we get to your journalism,
[Amit Varma]: what were the sort of kind of books that you read? What were the writers that you read? Like,
[Amit Varma]: I'm sort of trying to understand that when you begin this journey of yours as a journalist,
[Amit Varma]: who are your influences? Do you think that, oh, I should write like this or like that or like that?
[Amit Varma]: Are you actually thinking of sort of writing as your calling? Or are you just by accident,
[Amit Varma]: as you said, you came into journalism and you know how to write so it fits? Well,
[Amit Varma]: what were those kind of early influences? What was your view of the world at that time?
[Guest]: No, not really. If you want me to articulate answer, I have to figure out what to answer. But
[Guest]: if you want me to honest, no, absolutely. I don't think there was any role model before me.
[Guest]: And also while reading, like in school and college days, I devoured everything which
[Guest]: come on my way. It could be even adult books. In fact, my father often caught me on reading books,
[Guest]: which I should not have read. And I did not know that, like Lady Chatterley's Lover,
[Guest]: I wrote, I read and then some of the Bengali things, which is in school,
[Guest]: seven, eight standard school. In fact, in school library, I used to also ask for those kind of
[Guest]: books. And they, of course, did say no. And that made me more curious than I found out how to get
[Guest]: those books. So I was pretty indiscriminate what I read. I mean, it was mostly in Bengali,
[Guest]: a bit of in English, because I came from a Bengali, I was not into English medium school,
[Guest]: etc. Right. So you'll be disappointed to hear that. So it is mostly Bengali. And then, of course,
[Guest]: English also, because in my family, there are my brother is in into civil service and teaching is
[Guest]: English, PhD, etc, etc. So there are room full of books in English also. So I was pretty
[Guest]: indiscriminate, whatever I used, I used to devour. That's the school, college, university days.
[Guest]: And when I became a journalist, I don't, sometime I consciously don't read, I don't want to get
[Guest]: influenced by somebody's style, etc. And here, if you ask me, actually, I read less. I read less
[Guest]: in the last 30 years or what I read is primarily I read for information, what comes on my way,
[Guest]: because need to be abreast and all. So I last 25 years, I would say 1994-95, I started into this
[Guest]: into this financial sector. So one area of reading is primarily to get to know things,
[Guest]: it's information for information. And other part is just to be in conversation. You know,
[Guest]: one book is like everybody talks about it, you have to join the conversation. So you better read
[Guest]: it. And third is somebody said, have you read this? Like, for instance, firefighting, you know,
[Guest]: by Gettner and three of them, they brought. Did I read it during this crisis, financial sector
[Guest]: crisis, Lehman crisis? No, firefighting, I wrote sometime back, because somebody said,
[Guest]: have you seen firefighting? There's a lovely segment of charts. I thought, okay, why not in
[Guest]: my book, I can incorporate those charts, those kind of charts. Then I, I read firefighting
[Guest]: during the COVID time before starting my book. And then I actually stole the idea of getting
[Guest]: the charts as a chapter from there. So this just to give an example. Right now, I am I am reading
[Guest]: a book is Code Name God, which has nothing to do, you know, by Mani Bhaumik, who is that famous
[Guest]: physicist who is the discoverer of LASIK eye surgery. Somebody said, have you read it? Because
[Guest]: when I was talking about, look, COVID is makes me depressed. I want to understand, you know,
[Guest]: not philosophically the meaning of life, etc. But slightly I want to understand things I'm
[Guest]: slightly getting, you know, disturbed, not sleeping well, is that you read Mani Bhaumik's
[Guest]: Code Name God, he was a famous physicist, he was the one of the richest Indian, probably the most
[Guest]: richest Indian in US, you will find some answer to your question. So I am reading it now, I'm
[Guest]: finding it difficult because it's physics theories, etc, etc. So I'm slowly, slowly reading it.
[Guest]: So that's it. So there are four or five types of book, but I never read any book consciously to
[Guest]: model by writing on them. And neither have anybody who I and I admire many for their writings. But
[Guest]: I want to write like that kind of that person or that book. No, I actually stay away from this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I also want to ask you about something which is not related to the subject of your book
[Amit Varma]: directly, but like a final question on your personal journey before we get to your books
[Amit Varma]: and the subject of your book, which is you just and I've been noticing that while you've been
[Amit Varma]: telling me all these stories, you've been bringing in all these concrete details, like
[Amit Varma]: somebody took something out from a Godrej Almira and all of that, which is wonderful and evocative.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd like you also mentioned that when you first entered the Times of India office,
[Amit Varma]: there's a row of people typing away on typewriters. Yes. And sometimes when I look back,
[Amit Varma]: like I started working in the mid 1990s. And I remember when I was in my first job in advertising
[Amit Varma]: in 94, I was just for a few months in what was then India's largest advertising agency. And there
[Amit Varma]: were two or three computers on my floor, which was a massive, you know, so you had to write things by
[Amit Varma]: hand. And it was just the whole thing was a very complex process. Everybody would be fighting to
[Amit Varma]: get to the computers. There was no MS Word. There was a thing called WordStar. So just in terms of
[Amit Varma]: technology and workflows, everything is different. And how everything is also different in the modern
[Amit Varma]: age is that today everything is immediate, right? Today, the news cycle is so compressed that there
[Amit Varma]: is no scope to go deep. Everybody is just catering to the hunger for instant information, the instant
[Amit Varma]: hot take and all of that. And I understand it's not like journalism was particularly deep back
[Amit Varma]: in the day in the 90s. You know, I've had friends who worked in newspapers saying, yeah, it's like
[Amit Varma]: every day I have to do one story. How can I go deep? But having sort of, you know, built your
[Amit Varma]: career in those times and then continued through these times, what was your process as a journalist
[Amit Varma]: like in those days? Like, how would you do stories? What is the approach that you would take?
[Amit Varma]: What is the approach that your editors would take? And how much has it changed? And what is your
[Guest]: view of these changes? Definitely say if I split my career, you know, I would not take the first
[Guest]: 10 years, as I said, I was floating into feature writing, doing other things and all. So I got into
[Guest]: serious reporting, 94 and 95, I would say, Bombay back to Bombay after my little bit of innings in
[Guest]: Kolkata, and all. So they are the focus always, you know, on on exclusivity. So you need to you
[Guest]: need to get exclusive stories. You know, one, one newspaper is appreciated, or read and talked about
[Guest]: is that kind of exclusive stories. And to be honest, I was pretty good at doing exclusive
[Guest]: stories. And there are two parts of it, how you get a story, and how you write it. I think how
[Guest]: you get a story is true for everything, you know, whether you are covering Bombay Municipal
[Guest]: Corporation, or assembly, or anything else. So it's basically, I find it very interesting,
[Guest]: it's a psychological game, you know, you need to figure out who will give you in every organization,
[Guest]: there are no there are people who can just flaunt without being aware of it and giving you a story.
[Guest]: There are people who are actually anti establishment want to give you some story.
[Guest]: There are people who is aggrieved for certain reasons want to give you a story.
[Guest]: Every person has a vested interest, you know, somebody wants to prop up the company, somebody
[Guest]: wants to downgrade the company, somebody just for the zeal, something else. So it's a psychological
[Guest]: game, you need to get a story. I was pretty good at just to give one example, a CEO of financial
[Guest]: institution, I found it extremely difficult to get cracking. And then one fine morning,
[Guest]: somehow I managed an invitation for a cup of tea in his house. And there, I found on the
[Guest]: older walls, there are big photographs of cat. So I said, Who's this? Is it is my daughter in law.
[Guest]: And she's from us. And she can't follow local language you have to speak to in English.
[Guest]: And then she called the cat Maya, her name, M-A-Y-A, Maya, Maya, this girl, a big cat comes,
[Guest]: jumps onto his lap and all that cat was stuck in a lift in some US someplace. His son was there and
[Guest]: he exported it to India. That's how the thing. Incidentally, I'm also cat lover and dog lover.
[Guest]: So we had a conversation. And we struck a friendship like that. And then news flow started,
[Guest]: news flow started, he can empathize with me, he can found this another person who actually loves
[Guest]: Maya like me. And that's how our friendship started. And till the time that person was in
[Guest]: office, it was just the story was a call away, because I was a great cat lover, and genuinely so
[Guest]: and I loved his cat and I used to frequent his house only for that Maya. So the point I'm making
[Guest]: it was exclusivity and how you get it. You can't be trained. It's a psychological game,
[Guest]: you know, you need to figure out who is the person and what is the switch. It's just like making love.
[Guest]: How? Maya was his switch. Somebody else's switch could be different. I mean, you need to talk
[Guest]: probably his son who is in overseas and praise the son, how good is he? And that's how the ice melts.
[Guest]: Or something else you talk about. You don't talk about nicely about some politicians and you get
[Guest]: him on this thing. You can be a little pseudo, not exactly sincere, as long as you're not doing
[Guest]: any harm. It's a psychological play. So the focus has been in the 90s, etc. I'm talking about is the
[Guest]: exclusivity. And then two things happen, I think, as we move forward. One is this
[Guest]: exclusivity is yes, but because of the rules, regulations, SEBI, etc, etc, that flow of
[Guest]: exclusivity will be much less because the person who is giving the story away could be, you know,
[Guest]: in trouble, so on and so forth, exclusive, the flow will slightly dry up not entire thing, but
[Guest]: some. So then two things happen. One is the competition with other medium first with television
[Guest]: channel, and now with all the internet things and all. So that how fast you are, it's the fastest
[Guest]: finger fast, no more exclusivity is the information, information, information, that's all
[Guest]: that. So I would like to think bulk of the energy of the of the journalists now irrespective of
[Guest]: which platform you are on, you are on your high alert, how fast fastest finger fast,
[Guest]: not exclusivity at all exclusively. And second part that happens at the cost of this thing
[Guest]: exclusivity is now in terms of percentage of entire thing, the pie chart will be much less,
[Guest]: but how fast you are. And second is the interpretation. I think, because news is
[Guest]: a commodity, and I can get it on my mobile on a real time basis, I really don't care much for
[Guest]: information, but I care for interpretation. So the second part is this is the how you interpret
[Guest]: things, you know, that's very critical. I think the the opinion writers and commentators are much
[Guest]: more appreciated today than they were much before is this because, well, I get the information so
[Guest]: fast, but I want to understand what does it mean. And so you need to tell the story in a different
[Guest]: way than what it was. I think it's it's still unfolding. I'm not getting into a thing which
[Guest]: media no more an intermediary, you start taking sides, and the views and news getting merged,
[Guest]: particularly on television channels, etc. I'm not getting into that segment at all. I'm just
[Guest]: telling you pure plain news. I think premium on exclusivity still continues. But they are not
[Guest]: everything. One prong in the entire play is how fast you can churn out fastest figure first because
[Guest]: you are competing, different models are competing. And other is more than the news also the not the
[Guest]: views, the interpretations and etc. So these are the newer things, which it's still unfolding.
[Guest]: And of course, the other side of it is, of course, you get carried away. And then you you have view
[Guest]: and views overtake the news, the the borderline between views and news are getting blurred.
[Guest]: That's a different debate altogether.
[Amit Varma]: All of this is really fascinating. I have a couple of quick sort of asides, which will lead to a
[Amit Varma]: question. And the first aside is a little bit a trivial you spoke of exclusiveness. I remember I
[Amit Varma]: was a cricket journalist in the early 2000s. And there was a legendary gentleman who was a writer
[Amit Varma]: for the Telegraph, the Calcutta paper. And he used to boast about how Imran Khan has given him 1000
[Amit Varma]: interviews and no one else has interviewed Imran Khan more. And then I remember one day, while we
[Amit Varma]: were on tour, you know, going online and seeing one of his reports, and there was a line in it,
[Amit Varma]: which said speaking exclusively to the Telegraph, Imran Khan said, no comment.
[Guest]: So that's, I don't want to name that person, but I know who you are talking about.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And the other point that also strikes me as an observation from my cricketing days,
[Amit Varma]: and this is something that my listeners might be interested to know also, is that there was
[Amit Varma]: this very interesting shift that happened shortly before the time that I started writing and part of
[Amit Varma]: the, I of course, used to work at Wisden and Crickinfor, but I also wrote for the Guardian
[Amit Varma]: for a point in time. And the British papers at one point in time, realized that they have to
[Amit Varma]: change their cricket coverage. Because what would happen is, like you said, information became a
[Amit Varma]: commodity. You know, earlier in the 60s and 70s, you might pick up the newspaper to find out what
[Amit Varma]: happened in the match. But by the late 90s and 2000s, you know what happened in the match,
[Amit Varma]: it happened on television, you might have seen it live. So the cricket report cannot give the
[Amit Varma]: bare facts. So therefore, a good cricket report would have some color, it would have some
[Amit Varma]: perspective, like you said, some interpretation, it would be a little deeper, it would be different,
[Amit Varma]: you had to do that. And like when I was at Crickinfor, we kind of covered everything,
[Amit Varma]: we had a bulletin, which was just say information, we used to give a verdict, which was,
[Amit Varma]: you know, somebody's take on what happened, we had color pieces, all of that is interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Now coming to the interpretive aspect of it, you know, you've mentioned that when you first got
[Amit Varma]: into financial journalism, you knew nothing about finance. So what you're really doing now,
[Amit Varma]: I don't agree with that. But I think I think what what would therefore have happened is that
[Amit Varma]: you were asking simple questions, stupid questions, just getting the basic dope.
[Amit Varma]: Now, obviously, you mature in the business, you know, a little bit more than you're getting
[Amit Varma]: interpretive. One, what kind of lenses do you then form to look at that world? And two, does it then
[Amit Varma]: become something at the back of your mind that if I express a view that so and so say, governor of
[Amit Varma]: the RBI may not like, I might lose access or I might whatever, is that a trade off that you have
[Guest]: to play with? No, absolutely not. I don't agree with that. See, when I started in bank reporting,
[Guest]: I was in mid 90s, banking was a very esoteric subject, there are not too many bank reporters
[Guest]: were there. And I remember in Kolkata, my newspaper editor will come to interview Dr.
[Guest]: Rangarajan, who was the governor, he would fly down, do the interview, come back.
[Guest]: And the previous 24 hours, you know, there has to be like, pinned up silence near his
[Guest]: cabinet, etc. Shh, he's preparing, he's preparing to meet governor kind of thing. Or somebody is
[Guest]: writing on credit policy sitting in Kolkata. You know, don't don't make sound that that was the
[Guest]: kind of culture was there, it was very esoteric subject. And as a reader, I would read and I will
[Guest]: not understand also, even after all these kinds of things. So as I said, then things change,
[Guest]: generally things change more and more people are getting into this. And that you know, you actually
[Guest]: start throwing stones at the glass house and you demystify things and come here. And then
[Guest]: you do things in a different way you interpret. Now, I would say it's very important to convince
[Guest]: the other side that you don't have any agenda. Like, I might be going wrong, you know, not that
[Guest]: every interpretation is correct. And I'm accepting that I can't be the know all person. So sometimes
[Guest]: I go wrong. I think it's not only my acceptance, but the other sides also need to know that,
[Guest]: well, this fellow does not have any agenda. He doesn't have any vested interest, but this one
[Guest]: case he has gone wrong. So probably, I'll pick him, I'll call him and say that is that happens
[Guest]: with me. People say that, why you have gone wrong? I said, Yes, please. I mean, because my teacher
[Guest]: probably not said in most of the cases, I do and not one teacher, I do also multiply check because
[Guest]: to understand things better and to make it as impersonal objectives as possible.
[Guest]: So I think if the institutions or the persons who are involved in that news, if they are
[Guest]: pretty certain that what happened A, yes, genuinely, this is a mistake, I have but I have
[Guest]: no vested interest. So they will not shut the door for me. And B, certain things happen is this,
[Guest]: there is something really happened. And this is not a very pleasant story for the organization
[Guest]: per se. And but I have written it and it's correct. So if you are a professional,
[Guest]: you would not mind this. To give an example, I know name, it's about a large bank.
[Guest]: Post Lehman, I wrote a story. It came on Mint those days, on a big way on the page one,
[Guest]: this bank had massive liquidity problem. And that bank borrowed money from overseas,
[Guest]: it's a private bank, it borrowed money from Indian bank from his overseas operations,
[Guest]: and at a very high interest rate. So I gave a graphic ball by ball commentary,
[Guest]: commentary, I had everything on. And that this particular bank stock was hammered,
[Guest]: probably 20 odd percent or more, it fell down. The entire day the CEO had to spend on television,
[Guest]: different television channels explained to people that what exactly happened.
[Guest]: There was almost a run on the bank. And Reserve Bank of India actually had issued a note also,
[Guest]: if I remember it correctly, in the evening that everything is fine with the bank.
[Guest]: I was also interviewed on various channels. And I was asked that how bad is the scenario? I said,
[Guest]: no, the bank is fine, there should not be any concern about deposit money, etc, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But it is an extremely negative story as far as the bank is concerned. But did I lose my contact
[Guest]: connectivity and the relationship with the CEO and etc? No, definitely not. They are pretty upset.
[Guest]: But I think a few months down the line, on my event, because I used to run event even now,
[Guest]: the current paper I do, the CEO attended. Because the CEO knew that I had no vested interest,
[Guest]: just I had played a journalist job. And probably had that information gone into somebody else,
[Guest]: the treatment of it probably could have been different. So I think as long as you can
[Guest]: convince them that you are not irresponsible, if I am responsible and ethical, I think they will
[Guest]: give me a chance if I go wrong at times. In this case, I did not go wrong. So even if I am writing
[Guest]: stories which not exactly suits their purpose, or even if I have gone wrong sometime, but this is
[Guest]: a genuine mistake, I think my doors will not be closed. As long as I follow this basic principle
[Guest]: of ethics. And as I said, irresponsibility. They'll recognize that it's in good faith. It's
[Amit Varma]: good to know the banking world is like that. Because back when I was a cricket journalist,
[Amit Varma]: the cricket world wasn't exactly like that. My experience. Yeah, yeah. I'm not saying that this
[Guest]: is the rule. But my experience is this. No, I mean, and I think it's a model for every journalist
[Amit Varma]: that just tried to write in good faith and to cover every angle. And I think people will
[Amit Varma]: appreciate that. My other question, you know, before we get to your book relates to something
[Amit Varma]: that you've actually opened your book with, where you talk about how it's like Rashomon,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that there are these multiple points of view from different, there is this
[Amit Varma]: complexity. And I think you've done an amazing job sort of capturing so much of that. At the
[Amit Varma]: end of the book, I obviously knew a lot more about the subject than I did before, which is next to
[Amit Varma]: nothing. But I still didn't exactly know where you're coming from, which is a good thing that
[Amit Varma]: you haven't put too much of your opinions on it. Now, my thing is that, you know, another metaphor
[Amit Varma]: one can use for a complicated subject is that old proverb about different blind people describing an
[Amit Varma]: elephant by touching different parts. Right. And it strikes me that whenever we learn a new subject,
[Amit Varma]: and it's certainly been the case with me, that whenever you learn a new subject, you begin from
[Amit Varma]: one vantage point, maybe you read a book on the subject, or there is a received wisdom on the
[Amit Varma]: subject, and you begin with that. And that's your view to start with. And of course, you're open
[Amit Varma]: and finding out more. But over a period of time, you'll get another view, and then another view,
[Amit Varma]: and then another view, and gradually you begin to see the whole elephant as it were. So, have you
[Amit Varma]: felt through your career, sort of your views evolving in this way and getting richer as you
[Guest]: go along, so you see more of the big picture? Absolutely. I think one is this, A, I follow one
[Guest]: basic principle is this, I can go wrong. So, I am open to ideas, I am not rigid at all, I don't have
[Guest]: the last word on anything. And this is because of my handicap, I don't have the, as I said,
[Guest]: the background of the academic background or understanding theory, etc, etc. So, one basic
[Guest]: principle is this, I don't know everything, I can go wrong, I am flexible in my approach.
[Guest]: And second is, of course, as we grow intellectually, professionally, biologically,
[Guest]: as we know more people, more doors get open. So, you are interacting with more people.
[Guest]: And that's how it happens. And there, as I said, I don't read too many books,
[Guest]: but I continuously am in touch with people. And I find that if I can spend a meaningful
[Guest]: time, half an hour, one hour with an important person and get to know things, this is far
[Guest]: better than reading two books on that particular subject. Provided you have an honest conversation,
[Guest]: the person is not taking you for a ride. I think that's the case. It's a very,
[Guest]: nothing is absolute right. No, it's a very layered, truth is very layered,
[Guest]: even in financial sector. Yes, interest is going up, going down, or that's a separate
[Guest]: story altogether, what's happening in the bond prices and all. But if you see the overall
[Guest]: scenario, it's pretty complex, it's pretty layered. And how you look at it, different
[Guest]: constituents look at it different way. If you are a banker, you are looking at it,
[Guest]: if you are a customer, you are looking at it in a different way. If you are a government,
[Guest]: which is the owner of the banking, a large part of the bank looks at it in a different way.
[Guest]: If you are an investor, you look at it in a different way. Now, the most bank which is,
[Guest]: the investors are very happy, the customers are not necessarily very happy.
[Guest]: So, there are ways of looking at things. And so, we need to, I think as a journalist,
[Guest]: what I believe is this to reach out to as many people as possible, and a different constituencies,
[Guest]: different constituents of people to get a 360 degree angle of what's happening. So,
[Guest]: you have to have a long shot. And at the same time, you need to also have a granular details
[Guest]: to write the story. So, fly on the wall. I think the challenge is how do you combine that two?
[Guest]: You know, one is this, you have to have a solid grip over the entire thing, you know what is
[Guest]: happening, and the multi layered perspectives. And other is the granular details, as if you are
[Guest]: present there. So, in all my books, I try to, whenever things come, I try to be that, you know.
[Guest]: So, that's where I think it's all again the same. I think I'm repeating myself. It's a part of the
[Amit Varma]: part of the storytelling, how do you approach things? Wonderful. Let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break now. And at the end of it, after the commercial break, rather, we'll come back to
[Amit Varma]: talking about Pandemonium. Okay, thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen and I'm chatting with Amal Bandopadhyay about his wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book, Pandemonium. Let's talk about this book now because your previous books are all like about one
[Amit Varma]: subject. So, you know, whether it's the Lehman Brothers crisis, what happened after that,
[Amit Varma]: or HDFC or Sahara, they're all about one subject. But here, you've not only, you know, taken a really
[Amit Varma]: broad canvas. But what I found fascinating was you've taken different approaches to the
[Amit Varma]: storytelling where there's a lot of analysis, there's a lot of straight up storytelling.
[Amit Varma]: There are those interviews with the four former governors of the RBI. And there's a chapter with
[Amit Varma]: charts, where you're kind of making those charts speak for themselves and be so revelatory. So,
[Amit Varma]: was this a conscious decision, because you felt that there was so much content,
[Amit Varma]: that you couldn't contain it with one approach, you had to do all of these things?
[Guest]: No, because, as I said, there is no straight answer to the crisis, what led to the crisis.
[Guest]: If you allow me, actually, what led to the writing of the book also, then you I can,
[Guest]: I'll be able to explain to you better. It's in October, I think, 15th October,
[Guest]: our finance minister, Mrs. Shirmala Sitharaman attended in US in one of the meeting,
[Guest]: you know, there was a moderated discussion. Arvind Panagraia was moderator, and she explained
[Guest]: India's dream of becoming a 5 trillion economy. And then there are some question answer sessions.
[Guest]: So, one of the gentlemen were present there asked a question referring to a speech of Raghuram Rajan
[Guest]: and saying that Dr. Rajan feel that too centralized regime, the power structure in India
[Guest]: is responsible for economy not been able to attend his potential growth. Now, madam, do you
[Guest]: agree with that? And she was, I think, quite taken aback with this question. She said,
[Guest]: can you repeat again? And the gentleman repeated the question. And then she took a long answer.
[Guest]: Essentially, she said that, I have respect for Dr. Rajan, you are referring to Dr. Rajan's comment.
[Guest]: But do you know that during Dr. Rajan's time, it's Dr. Rajan and Dr. Manmohan Singh,
[Guest]: for the public sector banking industry, that was the worst time in India, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And somebody was present on a real time called me in India that Tamal, you have been following this
[Guest]: industry for quite some time. Do you agree with that assessment, that it's Rajan and Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh, they are the villains of the peace? And that set the ball rolling that I said,
[Guest]: that question can actually lead to a book. And Rowley publisher, Kapil, also had an idea of
[Guest]: catching the big picture of that. So that was the origin. And because there is no straight answer,
[Guest]: there are multiple answer, how did we get into the mess? Is it the 90s, the death of development
[Guest]: financial institutions and conversion of the banking, our banks into universal banks,
[Guest]: and they started giving project loan also, which they are not very comfortable, they only knew,
[Guest]: they only knew, or even now they know only working capital loans giving. So is it the
[Guest]: reason for this, that kind of mess? Or during Dr. Reddy's regime between 2006 and 2008,
[Guest]: the three years when Indian economy was growing 9% plus, credit growth was more than three times or
[Guest]: three times of the GDP growth, inflation was low. So those are the years of irrational exuberance,
[Guest]: did that sow the seeds of the problem? Or is it during Subbarao's regime,
[Guest]: post Lehman crisis, the ultra-loose monetary policy, and he was pretty slow in unwinding,
[Guest]: he was taking baby steps, and that is how we got the very high inflation, etc., etc.
[Guest]: So is it the, the root of the problem is this? Or Dr. Raghuram Rajan, was he over-aggressive
[Guest]: in cleaning up the system? So there are multiple questions, you know, there is no, there is only
[Guest]: not only one question. And there are various ways of looking things in different parts, like
[Guest]: public sector banking industry, there is a problem. Is the private sector entirely,
[Guest]: you know, is a gold standard? No, you have Yes Bank, and then problem with ICICI Bank also.
[Guest]: You have problem with the rating agencies, they have not come out in the best of color during
[Guest]: this time. You have problem with the non-banking financial system. And then you have Reserve Bank
[Guest]: of India's war against NPA. And then RBI's inspection and supervision also, you know,
[Guest]: there are many questions unanswered, why they took so long to discover what's happening in Yes Bank
[Guest]: and all. So there are multiple questions, and there the truth has many layers. So obviously,
[Guest]: I needed to take a look through different lenses. But as I said, I wanted to combine the micro and
[Guest]: macro, I wanted to give a 360 degree point of view, as well as a fly on the wall kind of thing
[Guest]: I was present there. So that's the approach. And in additionally, I thought there'll be a value
[Guest]: addition, the governors who actually post economic liberalization, we had these governors, what do
[Guest]: they say? I approached everybody, not everybody responded positively, but those four who responded,
[Guest]: Rajan, Reddy, Rangarajan and Subbarao, this itself can be a book, what is their take on the problem?
[Guest]: And how have they come? And I have asked them, I would say brutal questions, like,
[Guest]: are you responsible for this? And they answered whatever it is. And then your charts you spoke
[Guest]: about, I thought it's a 1.5 lakh, 1,50,000 word books. So if you don't have time, probably,
[Guest]: you can only read the charts, some 16 odd charts, which tells the story. So that's the structure of
[Amit Varma]: the book. So you've mentioned a number of layers. And I'm going to ask you about each of those
[Amit Varma]: layers one by one, because they're all so fascinating. And I'll ask you to demystify it.
[Amit Varma]: But first of all, you know, you mentioned that what Nirmala Sitharaman said about Dr. Rajan
[Amit Varma]: and Manmohan Singh. And I love the fact that during your interview with him, you actually
[Amit Varma]: asked him this, that what's your response? And I'll quickly quote what Dr. Rajan said in response
[Amit Varma]: to this, where he said, quote, I do not want to get into the politics of it. She has to say what
[Amit Varma]: she has to say. What I will say is that I repeatedly told the government that if we do not
[Amit Varma]: clean it up quickly, you cannot blame the problem on the previous government. It will be your
[Amit Varma]: problem. I think now it is a government's problem. Stop quote. And these are very wise words. And
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, now we are in 2021, this government has been there since 2014. And it is,
[Amit Varma]: of course, true that many of these problems began before this government came to power.
[Amit Varma]: Like I did an episode with the journalist Pooja Mehra, who's written the book, The Lost Decade.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a lot of sort of description there of how so many of these problems,
[Amit Varma]: including especially the NPA problem happened in the previous regime, much of which you have also
[Amit Varma]: kind of described through your sort of narrative, which is so kind of fascinating. And what I loved
[Amit Varma]: about these interviews of all four is that you are asking them brutally honest questions,
[Amit Varma]: and they're giving you brutally honest answers, you know, like Subbarao, for example, admitting
[Amit Varma]: that, yeah, mistakes were made. But you can see that in hindsight, in the moment we did what was
[Amit Varma]: right. And, you know, all of them being so kind of open about it. Do you feel that many of these
[Amit Varma]: bankers, even if they are like appointed by different political parties at different times,
[Amit Varma]: even if they're carrying out policies opposed to what the previous guy might have done,
[Amit Varma]: do they kind of see themselves as part of a community of bankers who are all after all
[Amit Varma]: working for the, you know, the good of the nation and the good of the industry?
[Guest]: So there, I would call them the warriors kind of thing. It's basically, we have a large government
[Guest]: owned industry, which is stock will be about 65%. That's the public sector banking. The numbers have
[Guest]: gone down, but their market share have not. I mean, it's going down slowly. That's a separate
[Guest]: story altogether. But they are basically a sort of warriors. And it's the government that calls
[Guest]: the shot. So I don't think they have any political affiliations, or they have their own ideology,
[Guest]: etc. Nothing. It's whatever they've been asked to do, they do this and irrespective of which
[Guest]: government is in power. Now, the larger issue is this as Dr. Y. V. Reddy has mentioned in an
[Guest]: interview also, it's not the ownership, but how the owner behaves. It's a socio-political
[Guest]: instrument. Banking in India, the state owned banking system is a socio-political instrument.
[Guest]: You know, in the 80s, there's a Tata steel ad, we also make steel. I think the bankers can say we
[Guest]: also do banking, because beyond banking, there are so many other things they need to do.
[Guest]: You will find that such Bharat Day, the branch managers on a broom on the pavement near their
[Guest]: branches to cleaning up the things. So, there are so many things, it's basically, it's a
[Guest]: socio-political instrument in the banking system. So, you need to decide that whether they will
[Guest]: continue to do or you treat them like a business units. You can't have the best of both worlds,
[Guest]: that they will do financial inclusion, they will go for MSME lending. This time,
[Guest]: it is government guaranteed the 3 trillion, 3 lakh crore rupees during the COVID time,
[Guest]: but otherwise, they are always under pressure to go certain segments, whether it is MSME,
[Guest]: SME, or infrastructure lending. In certain areas, they do not have the expertise, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So, but the government pressure and this is irrespective of which government is in power.
[Guest]: I am not talking about the phone banking, which this government has been talking about it,
[Guest]: that basically, calling them up and telling them this industrialist, you give loan on that
[Guest]: industrialist. I am not talking about that. I am talking about irrespective of which government
[Guest]: is power. It is a greater good of the nation and the society and the downtrodden people,
[Guest]: the so called bottom of the pyramid, they have been using the banking system. And the bankers,
[Guest]: the CEOs and MDs of those banks, I don't think they have any ideology, they don't have any
[Guest]: political affiliation. They are just the warriors of the government, whatever they have been asked
[Guest]: to, they have been doing it. Now, you can't have this and plus also, they will be a great entities
[Guest]: as a business entities, you can't have both the two. So, you have to take a call. And I'm glad
[Guest]: that this budget has spoken about privatization to start with two banks. I think they should go
[Guest]: for more, probably a few large banks can remain as a sort of insurance against market failure and
[Guest]: to do the government things like MSME financing, financial inclusion, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But let the others go and run as a business enterprises. And that brings me to this larger
[Amit Varma]: question that has often struck me that when you bring these two together, that at one level,
[Amit Varma]: a bank is a bank. And you might say that we don't only do banking, but banking is noble, finance
[Amit Varma]: runs the entire economy. That's noble enough by itself, you don't need to do more than that.
[Amit Varma]: But when you add these social objectives on that, do the incentives go in the opposite direction?
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, I haven't read your book on Lehman Brothers, but one of the things,
[Amit Varma]: one of the perverse incentives that played a very small part in the 2008 crisis happening was,
[Amit Varma]: of course, when the US passed the Community Reinvestment Act of the late 1970s, where they
[Amit Varma]: mandated that, you know, housing loans have to be given to people who would otherwise not qualify
[Amit Varma]: as credit worthy. And many of those added to, you know, those perverse incentives and added to
[Amit Varma]: what later became, you know, a bad loans problem. So is it a similar thing? I mean, how does then
[Amit Varma]: one balance all this right on one hand, you say that, okay, these public sector banks are not just
[Amit Varma]: banking, there are all these social objectives that they have to fulfill, which might be noble
[Amit Varma]: objectives. But maybe there are other ways of doing that. But your mandate, they do that.
[Amit Varma]: And plus, you have all the other incentives they have is that no one's really accountable within
[Amit Varma]: the governmental system, right? You are not like in a private sector bank, there is always a pressure
[Amit Varma]: of the market. If you have too many bad loans, the market will punish you. In a public sector bank,
[Amit Varma]: market won't punish you. Instead, the government will recapitalize you with, you know, yours and
[Amit Varma]: my money, taxpayers money. So what do you feel about this sort of interplay of incentives that
[Guest]: happens? No, absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, what happened is this like mudra loan, okay?
[Guest]: You force the banks to give the loan. Now, it's an abnormal time, the COVID time,
[Guest]: things have gone different. But even pre-COVID, I'm talking about, you need to find out how is
[Guest]: the mudra loan living. I have heard RBI deputy governor from public forum saying that mudra loan
[Guest]: is, there are too much of NPA has been growing. So once you force the bankers to get into certain
[Guest]: areas, as I said, it's a social objective, socio-political objective. Now, then,
[Guest]: then you don't expect them to run like a business enterprises. So mudra loan is a classic example,
[Guest]: or say Kishan credit card, you ask, you ask any bankers, it's perpetually, you know,
[Guest]: it's always replenishment, the loans are never paid back. It's always the fresh loan and ever
[Guest]: greening, it's happening. Often, I can tell you this to Kishan credit card and mudra loan.
[Guest]: So what is happening, as you rightly said, that the social objective, you know, 51 years back,
[Guest]: 1969, bank nationalization happened in two stages. First stage was 1969. And then,
[Guest]: you know, you ask any bankers, they take enormous pride that we have built the nations, we have
[Guest]: built bridges, we have built toll roads, we have built everything, we have taken banking to the
[Guest]: banking to the hinterland, financial inclusion. Yes, they have all done this. But do we live in
[Guest]: this nostalgia and continue with that? Or is it the time that you recognize that this thing cannot
[Guest]: go? It has to be either or, either they continue to be in a situation where they will cater to our
[Guest]: socio-economic need, but then we let's not expect a dividend from them, let's not expect them to
[Guest]: run like a commercial organizations, or you do this, don't do that at all, and let them get the
[Guest]: gulp of new avatar should be a commercial organizations, which cannot be done unless
[Guest]: they are privatized. Because as I said, what Dr. Reddy said that it's not the ownership,
[Guest]: but how the owner behaves. He also said, they follow a rule of Hindu undivided family, it's
[Guest]: between RBI, the regulator and the banking division of finance ministry and the banks,
[Guest]: there is a very loose accounting policy system. Nobody actually cares, there is no,
[Guest]: there is no accountability as such. So, there are two extremes, and the midway should be which
[Guest]: probably the government is trying to follow now, part of them, partly you privatize them,
[Guest]: let them be more efficient as a business enterprise. And let there be certain entities,
[Guest]: still majority owned by the government to do this work. Because if that's the case,
[Guest]: the other side also, you know, the banks are not accountable. These are all very target oriented.
[Guest]: No, it's not target is not quality, but on quantity, this much loan you have to given,
[Guest]: it's not you will not find in that target, the quality of assets, it's the how expansive the
[Guest]: assets would be. Have you ever heard any banker being losing job because that person is inefficient?
[Guest]: No. On governance issues, there have been cases where somebody else, somebody at times have been
[Guest]: asked to step down. But on case of inefficiency, no. And look at the way they are being paid,
[Guest]: doesn't justify at all. When you look at their counterparts in the private sector,
[Guest]: the difference in the kind of pay package between the public sector bank CEOs and the private bank
[Guest]: CEOs. So, in every way, you know, you actually, their hands are tied from behind. And then you
[Guest]: can't expect them to do wonderful job, you can't have the best of both worlds. So, I think this is
[Guest]: the time now to take a call and happy to see that the budget has done it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, one of the interesting sort of nuggets in your book was that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the reason public sector bankers get paid so little compared to private sector
[Amit Varma]: counterparts is because a bureaucrat don't want them to get paid more than them.
[Guest]: Yes, it's capped at the bureaucrat salary.
[Amit Varma]: It's capped at the bureaucrat salary. And you mentioned bank nationalization, I came across
[Amit Varma]: this delightful nugget, which I'm going to read out in your book about that, which reminded me of
[Amit Varma]: another Prime Minister. And referring to how Indira Gandhi took the decision, you've written,
[Amit Varma]: quote, neither IG Patel, then the Economics Affairs Secretary, nor LK Jha, then RBI Governor,
[Amit Varma]: was taken into confidence. Even Morarji Desai, then Deputy Prime Minister, holding the charge
[Amit Varma]: of the Finance Ministry, was kept in the dark, stop quote. And I read this, and I immediately
[Amit Varma]: thought of Narendra Modi and demonetization. But I won't put you in the spot and ask you to comment
[Amit Varma]: on that. And again, about targets, you know, one of the quotes that struck me and which I highlighted
[Amit Varma]: about public sector banking was when you've written, quote, public sector banking is all
[Amit Varma]: about targets. These targets are first set by the government and reinforced at different levels in
[Amit Varma]: the bank's hierarchy. The quality of lending and recovery is not as important as achieving
[Amit Varma]: the loan target, stop quote, which you just elaborated upon. Let's now sort of talk about it.
[Guest]: You know, I just call them complaint boy, you know, it's all about how tall you become.
[Guest]: So, they're all complaint boys. Public sector banking is all about being complaint boys and
[Guest]: complaint girls, so that you are tall, your balance sheet is large, but not inherently,
[Guest]: are you strong? No, no offense on complaint as such, I just loosely I'm saying that. This is
[Guest]: what, it's all about the height. In complaint, it's all about the height, I'm a complaint boy,
[Guest]: I'm a complaint girl, here is all about how big is your balance sheet.
[Amit Varma]: Now I'm getting full on nostalgia because you're bringing up these 80s commercials earlier,
[Amit Varma]: it was is part bhi hum banate hain, now complaint girl, I'm waiting for you to mention,
[Amit Varma]: now you've become a Bonvita mom or Maltova mom, which one was it, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's now get to sort of, I found your first chapter of your book absolutely incredible. It's
[Amit Varma]: called, like for the listeners, the title is Who Killed Indian Banking? And one by one,
[Amit Varma]: you are examining all these different layers, like you said, and I'd like you to sort of
[Amit Varma]: go through those different layers with me as well. And one interesting point you make
[Amit Varma]: early on is that about DFIs, Development Financial Institutions and how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: shutting them down in the 90s was something that kind of changed the environment. Tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about these DFIs and the role they played and why that transition could have played a part in
[Guest]: the crisis today. No, it's basically, you know, we had this IFCI, IDBI and ICICI, and there are a
[Guest]: few others, is basically in the project financing. So, you have banks, which were into working
[Guest]: capital loans, and you have DFIs, which are into project financing. And the DFIs were actually,
[Guest]: they used to get sort of subsidy from government in the form of long term money at a concessional
[Guest]: rate. But post liberalization, it was decided that they would not get this anymore. And if
[Guest]: they would not get it, then where would the money come from? That's the problem. And then they got
[Guest]: into the problem of asset liability mismatches, which ICICI and IDBI was forced to convert
[Guest]: themselves into bank. Now, they got merged with the bank themselves. So, essentially, we embraced,
[Guest]: we pulled down the dividing wall between DFIs and banks. And we made the banks, the so called
[Guest]: universal bank, which will take care of everything. But unfortunately, our bankers have been trained
[Guest]: for working capital loans, they have not been trained for project loans, because project loans,
[Guest]: a of course, you need long term money. And then the risk management, etc, is pretty different.
[Guest]: And of course, along with the DFIs, had there been say bond market, then I mean, the really
[Guest]: vibrant bond market, that would have been a different story. But this has not happened.
[Guest]: So, ICICI had to get merged itself with ICICI bank, it happened. I discussed about how Mr. K.
[Guest]: B. Kamath made the presentations to Reserve Bank of India, and explained that how that what kind of
[Guest]: how many slides were the presentation, I spoke about that. And essentially, the asset liability
[Guest]: mismatches, and they could not survive, it had to be done. And similarly, it happened with IDBI
[Guest]: later. And now it's very interesting that if you ask me now, as we speak, this budget is talking
[Guest]: about DFI, that the government, the budget is talking about the DFI will come up and you should
[Guest]: give some 5 trillion 5 lakh crore worth of loan in the next three years or so that's the plan.
[Guest]: But the key question is, where will the money come from? Government can give the capital,
[Guest]: but the money come from in 90s, we had to close down the DFIs because the short the
[Guest]: tap for the government long term, low cost money was closed. Now, are we going to open that tap
[Guest]: again, you know, reversing the decision of 90s after 20 years or but where did the money come
[Guest]: from because of fiscal deficits. So, there are many questions need to be answered, or what will
[Guest]: be the model of this DFI, we do not know. But the fact remains is this, the DFI had to go,
[Guest]: the banks have not learned the way to lend project financing, both in terms of risk appraisal and
[Guest]: monitoring. And that's what one of the reasons we are in MS.
[Amit Varma]: So, if I might ask what might be a stupid question, it's been 30 years, why haven't they
[Guest]: learned? That's that I think bankers, they, you know, the book also dealt with one of the key
[Guest]: reasons which are related, like the State Bank of India had a merchant banking queen called SBI
[Guest]: caps. Now, SBI caps have been primarily working as a appraisal of the all the project financing.
[Guest]: Now, there's a clear conflict of interest. And I mentioned about that and Reserve Bank of India
[Guest]: sometime back had said that, that the investment banking arm of the country's largest lender
[Guest]: appraise the projects, and then it recommends and then it also hawks the projects to other banks.
[Guest]: Now, the SBI is big balance sheet and the ability to take risk is very different from much smaller
[Guest]: banks where their balance sheets are much smaller and their ability to take a risk.
[Guest]: But because SBI is doing this, and SBI caps has appraised and SBI caps hawking it,
[Guest]: the others will come on board. Because nobody wants to, as I said, it's a target
[Guest]: compliant boy syndrome, if somebody is giving money, I also need to be there.
[Guest]: And I'm sure there'll be pressure from the ministry and all, you need to get into infrastructure,
[Guest]: you need to give money, because you have periodical meeting with the ministry. And
[Guest]: there you have been asked that what is your how much loan you have given to infrastructure sector,
[Guest]: so on and so forth. So, I think it's a combination of multiple things. So, there is no individual
[Guest]: project appraisal in accordance with your balance sheet and risk appetite. It is because the
[Guest]: country's largest bank is going there, because it is appraised by the investment banking arm of that
[Guest]: largest bank, it's good and everybody else, irrespective of your risk appetite, your
[Guest]: balancing strength, what you can do, you go there, it's a sort of hard mentality.
[Guest]: And then you pay a price, because somebody will be able to take the knock because of the balancing
[Guest]: strength, but many of the if when the loan goes bad, but many of you will not be able to take the
[Amit Varma]: hit. I'll come to SBI caps later, because that's also incredibly fascinating. One of the things
[Amit Varma]: you also mentioned is that one banks did not sort of develop the skill for this kind of project
[Amit Varma]: financing. And some of that might have to do with incentives, like you pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: and the way they all played out. But you also pointed out that a deep corporate bond market
[Amit Varma]: might have made a difference, but there was no such market. Tell me a bit about how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the shallowness of this market and I'm struck by one sentence in particular where about these
[Amit Varma]: bonds at one point you write quote, holidays also lead to inconvenience. If the redemption
[Amit Varma]: falls on a holiday, the issuer is required to pay up on the last working day before the holiday,
[Guest]: but different states have different sets of holidays. Yes. Yeah, you know, these are all
[Guest]: little technical things. But yes, these are all because you know, you have a market holiday at
[Guest]: different different states are different, like a Maharashtra Divas will be probably a holiday here.
[Guest]: Netaji Subhash Bose will be holiday in West Bengal. So if you are a subscribed to that
[Guest]: particular bond, and if your end day is that, then you are inconvenienced. So there are there
[Guest]: are multiple issues we have been talking about for decades now on creation of a corporate bond
[Guest]: market, but it's not happening for multiple issues, you know, tax is one angle, then this
[Guest]: is some silly holidays, another angle, and there are many more things and all. But the key issue
[Guest]: is, is one of the reasons why our bankers could get away by hiding is because we don't have a
[Guest]: corporate bond market. Now in a developed market, you know, like US or others, if you have a vibrant
[Guest]: corporate bond market, and if you are a defaulter, then no way you can hide yourself. No, today is
[Guest]: the redemption, you have not been able to do this. So you are exposed. But in a bank loan,
[Guest]: if you are a banker, and I am a borrower, we can work out some kind of deal between you and me,
[Guest]: which will be basically the so called evergreening, etc, etc, your balance sheet management,
[Guest]: because you have a vested interest. The moment you say Kamal is a defaulter, then you have to
[Guest]: provide for it, your provision will eat your capital, and you also tell the world your
[Guest]: investors will not be happy because Amit NP has gone up. So, it serves you also to help me out,
[Guest]: it the kind of nexus works out between you and me, which cannot happen in a corporate bond market.
[Guest]: Corporate bond market, Amit, you have subscribed to my bond, and I have not been able to pay you
[Guest]: the money back on that redemption day, you have no choice but to announce that Kamal has become
[Guest]: a defaulter. So, which is why it was much more difficult in India to wage a war against NPA.
[Guest]: Because the banking infrastructure gives you a mock screen to hide yourself.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fantastic point. And just to demystify for my listeners, what these sort of bonds are,
[Amit Varma]: and why the lack of a secondary market is a problem. I'll quickly quote from the book itself
[Amit Varma]: where Kamal writes quote, bonds are secured instruments which allow funds to be raised for the
[Amit Varma]: long term, or even forever in the case of perpetual bonds. If a bondholder wishes to exit, she can
[Amit Varma]: sell the instrument in the secondary market. Hence, a bank which uses short term financing or a mutual
[Amit Varma]: fund facing redemption demands can also pick up long term duration bonds without fear of asset
[Amit Varma]: liability mismatch. This of course, depends on a liquid secondary bond market where instruments
[Amit Varma]: are easily traded. This is the case in most developed markets, including the US, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And like you correctly said that when you don't have that kind of a market flourishing, you also
[Amit Varma]: therefore have less information and the market can't really punish you because there's nothing
[Amit Varma]: that it's looking at. There's nothing, you know, so I kind of get that another sort of factor and
[Amit Varma]: I'll come back to the banks and the evergreening and all those incentives later. I'm just going by
[Amit Varma]: the order of layers that you examined in your chapter. Another layer that you mentioned is sort
[Amit Varma]: of the flood of what you call the flood of money, where you talk about how our response to the 2008
[Amit Varma]: crisis, Mr. Subbarao's response was to just lower interest rates and flood of easy money flooding in.
[Amit Varma]: And some people have made the point that initially it might have been a wise thing to do,
[Amit Varma]: but he should have stopped. But just for a couple of years, it kept continuing. So tell me about how
[Amit Varma]: this could have been a contributing factor in the bad loans crisis that then took place later.
[Guest]: Well, what I'm saying is one of the assumptions. No, I don't have the last word on that.
[Guest]: It's one of the multiple factors. One factor is this, when Lehman happened, you know, this
[Guest]: Subbarao parachuted into as a central bank governor, just about a week before the Lehman
[Guest]: crisis. Reddy stepped down, I think 8th September or 9th September, I don't remember exactly,
[Guest]: just about roughly a week before. And 14th September, India time night, Lehman collapse
[Guest]: happened. Subbarao was the first finance secretary in office transported to RBI. There have been in
[Guest]: the cases from finance ministry, but they have gone through some other assignment then coming
[Guest]: here. But here is and then Lehman collapse and one way of preventing this kind of scenario,
[Guest]: like in COVID time also, we have seen that when market become extremely risk averse interest rate
[Guest]: hits the roof, you flood the system with money. You encourage people to borrow. One is this,
[Guest]: you break the risk averseness of financial intermediaries, you flood the system with money,
[Guest]: and you encourage consumers to borrow, so that borrow and spend so that quickly the,
[Guest]: you can get back to the normal, the economic growth, etc. It did happen, which is why even
[Guest]: the, we don't say, many of us say that it was not a global financial crisis, it was only a
[Guest]: transatlantic crisis, because its impact was limited, India did not have that. Dr. Rakesh
[Guest]: Mohan is one of the persons, deputy governor, he firmly believes that it was nothing to do with
[Guest]: globe, it's only transatlantic crisis. US peddled it as a global economic crisis. But look at India,
[Guest]: we are not affected. Only two quarters, I think our economic growth came down below 5%. We came
[Guest]: back. So, Subbarao brought down the rate to historic low, CRR also came down very low,
[Guest]: he flooded the system with money. But then when the normalcy was returning, he was slow in
[Guest]: unwinding. And there is a classic conflict always happens between the government and the
[Guest]: Reserve Bank of India. Because any government irrespective of its color is there for 5 years,
[Guest]: it can go beyond that. But typically, it's a 5 year horizon. And government feels that
[Guest]: the growth can only happen if you have a loose monetary policy, which is money in the system,
[Guest]: lot of money in the system and low interest rates, so people will borrow and people will spend.
[Guest]: But Reserve Bank of India feels that because it has a long term views and institution,
[Guest]: it does not feel in 5 years horizon, it does not see that. It feels that no, if you have a
[Guest]: sustainably low inflation, that can only ensure a long term growth. So, there is always a conflict.
[Guest]: And it depends on how a governor handles it. Now, so, Subbarao was under pressure from then
[Guest]: administration not to rewind. And he started what people say taking baby steps, while cutting the
[Guest]: rate by 1 percentage point, one and a half percentage point, 2 percentage point, while
[Guest]: hiking rate is 25 basis points. So, that showed the seeds of inflation. And that also by the time
[Guest]: all those people who wanted to have money, they have got their money, too much of money,
[Guest]: they have got etc, which also happened during Dr. Rajiv's regime also. And by the time Subbarao
[Guest]: realized and he started, you know, asserting himself and then there is a clear conflict
[Guest]: between ministry and him. And if you remember, his last policy 2013 before going, there was
[Guest]: tremendous pressure from the finance ministry, Mr. Chidambaram was the finance minister at that time
[Guest]: to cut the rates, but he stuck to his guns, he did not cut the rate. And then finance minister
[Guest]: Chidambaram on record television channel said, on the growth path, I have to walk alone,
[Guest]: RBI is not giving me shoulder. And Subbarao responded to this in his book in his inimitable
[Guest]: way. Incidentally, now, soon in current context, we will have the same scenario. Mr. Satyakant
[Guest]: Das, the current governor, he has flooded the system with money, with the CRR cut and many
[Guest]: other things. And he had brought the interest rate to historic low last year, lower than what
[Guest]: Subbarao did. And now as the growth picks up, he will have to figure out how to unwind. He has
[Guest]: already started like the CRR reinstating in two stages, but market was not happy. And in addition
[Guest]: to what Subbarao's problem here, he has Mr. current governor has a bigger problem because
[Guest]: COVID is a much bigger issue and fiscal deficit much higher now, government borrowing is much,
[Guest]: much higher. So, he has also the challenge of him, he has done a remarkable job to tackle COVID
[Guest]: and keep the financial success stability and bringing the economy to a growth path.
[Guest]: But now, as the time of unwinding comes, which is already knocking at the door, because we are
[Guest]: talking about 10.5% growth next year, he has to unwind. It cannot be always this kind of liquidity
[Guest]: sugar rush and low rates. So, what Subbarao faced during his regime, I'm afraid the current governor
[Guest]: also will face now. And that will be the litmus test of him, how to unwind.
[Amit Varma]: That's really fascinating the political aspect of it. I'll take this moment to point my listeners
[Amit Varma]: to an earlier episode I did with Pooja Mehra, who wrote this great book called The Great
[Amit Varma]: Lost Decade as well, where her narrative, if I'm remembering it correctly, was essentially that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Chidambaram and Subbarao together, Chidambaram was finance minister at the time,
[Amit Varma]: you know, lowered the rates as they had to, at that point in time, they felt it was wise.
[Amit Varma]: But then the terrorist attacks in Bombay happened. And Chidambaram was shifted to the home ministry
[Amit Varma]: because then home minister, I think it was Shivraj Patil wasn't doing a great job.
[Amit Varma]: And Pranab Mukherjee got put in the finance ministry. And Pranab was putting a sort of
[Amit Varma]: immense pressure to keep the interest rates low and to keep the easy money going, which would
[Amit Varma]: of course be in the interest of politicians to do always because, you know, you can give an
[Amit Varma]: appearance of growth that way. Now, would I be correct in just to again demystify why this is a
[Amit Varma]: problem, what low interest rates effectively do is they just, they increase the money supply,
[Amit Varma]: there's more money in the system. Some of it, of course, can reflect in everyday inflation for
[Amit Varma]: people. But what also happens is that banks, financial institutions, and all of that have
[Amit Varma]: more money to lend, more money to play around with. And therefore, they start giving more loans.
[Amit Varma]: And this can also play in with the politics. Like earlier, you referred to phone banking and
[Amit Varma]: allegations were even at that time that the finance ministry under Mukherjee was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: running a phone alone scheme, which is like almost self explanatory. So I was also struck by,
[Amit Varma]: again, I'd like to point my listeners to the interviews at the end of your book,
[Amit Varma]: the end of your book, because Dr. Rangarajan there says that India overreacted with those
[Amit Varma]: low interest rates, and that he warned against it from the Rajya Sabha where he was at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, Dr. Subbarao indicates that, yeah, in hindsight, you can say it was a mistake and it
[Amit Varma]: was but at the time, what do you do? These are the circumstances. Is that sort of an accurate
[Guest]: summation of everything that that's going on? No, one is this, as I said, Subbarao himself,
[Guest]: and at hindsight, we said that the ultra loose monetary policy was probably not exactly warranted
[Guest]: or had it been warranted, it could have unwinding could have been faster, baby steps did some
[Guest]: damage. And right now, what you are saying, if there is too much of money, we run the risk of
[Guest]: being in of inflation and misallocation of credit. On the first part, I do agree. Yes,
[Guest]: it will be inflationary too much of money is a plain economics, we don't need to get into the
[Guest]: theory. But on the other side, I have, no, I don't think so, because I think bankers have
[Guest]: learned a lot. You know, after this, the entire in RBI's fight against the NPA and the massive
[Guest]: cleanup, what happened and all. So, bankers have gone to the other extreme, they're becoming very
[Guest]: risk averse. And if you ask anybody in the past one year or so, even during the COVID time,
[Guest]: Reserve Bank of India and Finance Ministry is actually making this allegation that bankers
[Guest]: are risk averse. And if you ask the bankers, they will say in private, they will say, look,
[Guest]: when we were giving loans, and you found that we are pretty liberal in giving loans,
[Guest]: and we have burnt our fingers, we have found that things were not exactly did happen the way we
[Guest]: wanted, we accumulated bad assets, you blamed us. And they not only blame, some of them were sent
[Guest]: to jail. And then the all the investigative agencies were very active. And it's pretty
[Guest]: unfair in many cases. And now when we are using our discretion, I want to check who is worthy to
[Guest]: be given loan and who is not, you are telling me I am risk averse. So, what is? So, I don't
[Guest]: exactly agree with what you are apprehensions, probably no, because the backdrop is very
[Guest]: different than what happened in 2000 post Lehman crisis. There is no RBI in war against NPA,
[Guest]: there was no activism by the investigative agencies, bankers are not thrown into the jail,
[Guest]: so on and so forth. But between 2016 and 2018-19, these three, four years bankers had a torrid time,
[Guest]: I think they have learned a lesson, they will sit on the cash, they will give keep the money
[Guest]: with Reserve Bank of India's reverse repo window and earn in technically what you call negative
[Guest]: carry less than what they are paying to depositors. But they will not be easily carried away by the
[Guest]: flow and start giving money left, right and center, which they have done in the past,
[Amit Varma]: they have learned their lessons. In fact, you referred to this in your book is fear psychosis,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll go lovely phrase and I'll come to that as well. No, what I meant was not with reference to
[Amit Varma]: the present time. But in general, the one thesis is this is what happened then that because there
[Amit Varma]: was so much money in the system, there was just a lot of lending that went on. Let's also talk
[Amit Varma]: about like, one thing that I won't ask you to elaborate upon too much, I'll ask my listeners
[Amit Varma]: instead to just read your book on that is you've spoken about how, what you what you describe as
[Amit Varma]: infrastructure blues set in, where there were land acquisition issues of a power project issues,
[Amit Varma]: telecom issues, things were either stuck because of policy paralysis, which you've also written
[Amit Varma]: about that, you know, bureaucrats would be hesitant to sign on anything because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: allegations of corruption were huge. So no one wants to take a risk, they just want to really
[Amit Varma]: play it safe. And in all of these sectors, there were massive problems. And what happened because
[Amit Varma]: of all of these problems, therefore was that, you know, all these infrastructure companies have
[Amit Varma]: taken these loans, but now the project isn't happening. So what do they do? And yet, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they kept finding a way out due to, you know, various sort of tricks like evergreening and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, restructuring and other euphemisms which came in. Tell me a bit about how all of that kind
[Guest]: of started to then take place. No, it's essentially, you know, this is as I said, there are
[Guest]: and I'm very impressed the way you have read the book, you know, it's every bit I think you have
[Guest]: read. So this is one of the contributing factors. And as I said, bankers also have an interest,
[Guest]: you know, because if I'm a banker, if I, the moment I identify a one known as bad loan,
[Guest]: then I need to provide for it, it's into my capital, I'm not very sure whether the government
[Guest]: will give the capital to me. So it also helps me by camouflaging, by evergreening. That's what
[Guest]: they have done. And apart from many, many things else, the contributing factor is the policy
[Guest]: paralysis that you have said, which you have seen the second UPA, during the second part of UPA
[Guest]: between 2009 and 14, things were just not moving. There are problems with the environment ministry,
[Guest]: there are problems with the legal issues, and projects were not picking up. So if borrowers
[Guest]: have taken money, and then he's not getting the right kind of clearances, then the project will
[Guest]: not take off. So what do you do on that? So that's the kind of thing. So then you have,
[Guest]: I don't want to get into all the technicalities and burden your audience, as you rightly said,
[Guest]: one need to read it, but how even this project commencement date plays a, here in this case,
[Guest]: plays a very critical role, and how they are restructuring the loans and changing the project
[Guest]: commencement date, just to keep the loan alive. So if you look at the entire bank's books,
[Guest]: they're all restructured loan, and the NPAs were hiding within stack of restructured loan.
[Guest]: It's only after Reserve Bank of India start fighting it out, and forcing the banks to come
[Guest]: clean, then you look at the two charts, the restructured loan chart, and the NPA chart will
[Guest]: be very close to the restructured loan chart. And restructured loan is NPA plus other restructured.
[Guest]: So till about 2015-16, before the RBI started its war, the restructured loan chart will be very long,
[Guest]: and the NPA chart which will be next to it will be very short, because they were not accepting
[Guest]: it is my NPA, it's only restructured. But when RBI forced them, the NPA charts going up,
[Guest]: and the gap between the restructured loan chart and the NPA chart started, you know, closing up.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. And I want to kind of break this up, this problem of bad loans from the bank's
[Amit Varma]: point of view into two parts. One is how are they giving those bad loans? And two is once they
[Amit Varma]: realize that these loans are shady, what are they doing to kind of, what kind of different kinds of
[Amit Varma]: jugaad are they doing to kind of keep them going and not declare them as NPA? Now, when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to the first part, when it's sort of the giving of loans, at one point, you write, quote, seduced by
[Amit Varma]: the lure of credit growth, they fail to do due diligence and accept project appraisals done
[Amit Varma]: externally at face value. And then when they ran into trouble, they also tried to cover it up,
[Amit Varma]: etc, etc. And you also point out that these appraisals are, you know, a sham because like
[Amit Varma]: you say, quote, appraisals carried out by professional merchant bankers with conflict
[Amit Varma]: of interest as ever hired by borrowers, unquote. And this sounds to me exactly like the credit
[Amit Varma]: rating agencies in the US before the financial crisis there, that they are paid by sort of the
[Amit Varma]: borrower. So obviously, they'll give good ratings, incentives are just completely messed up. And
[Amit Varma]: you've referred earlier in this episode to SBI caps also. Tell me a little bit about SBI caps and
[Amit Varma]: how they, you know, the perverse role that they played in this.
[Guest]: No, it's actually, it was pulled up by Reserve Bank of India recently, some time back. SBI cap,
[Guest]: as I said, it's an investment banking arm, but there's a conflict of interest is hired by the
[Guest]: borrowers. And then of course, it in turns hires different agencies in that respective field,
[Guest]: whatever the best one, but ultimately, the buck stops there. It's the onus is on the SBI caps.
[Guest]: And then it does not stop here, it then hawks the, so first it's a role of the project appraisal,
[Guest]: which it of course, it outsource from various entities, and then it becomes the project
[Guest]: syndicator. So then what happens is that it sells the loan to others as well. And then how does it
[Guest]: sell because SBI is the lead lender, others get carried away, and everybody wants to be there.
[Guest]: Public sector banking is all about target. As I said, target is not about how impeccable is your
[Guest]: asset quality, what is your return on assets, what is your return on equity,
[Guest]: these are not the targets. Targets are what's your loan book, what's your deposit book,
[Guest]: how much money you have given to the SME sector, how much money you have given to the
[Guest]: priority sector, how much money you have given to the infrastructure, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So when you are under the pressure to meet the targets, so you become yourself an easy target,
[Guest]: easy prey for this. And that's how it happens. So there was nothing called project appraisal,
[Guest]: because its appraisal is done by an agency, only the top sheet gets changed. So you put your stamp
[Guest]: and put your bank's logo, etc., etc., it becomes your appraisal. And that's how it happens. That's
[Guest]: what exactly has happened. And when it goes, as I said, then it can go bad for multiple reasons.
[Guest]: Every promoter is not exactly ethical. What Dr. Rajan found out that many of the Indian
[Guest]: promoters actually don't bring in their own equity. So any project has two parts, equity and debt.
[Guest]: And depending on the profile of the project, the debt equity ratio depends. But there have been
[Guest]: many cases the promoters don't get their equity, they use the debt as equity and also debt. So
[Guest]: there would be definitely compromised promoters who don't want to, who just taking your money and
[Guest]: taking your money and don't want to pay back. And there will be external circumstances like
[Guest]: the what happened during this UPA 2, the entire policy paralysis. So it was a very complex scenario,
[Guest]: multiple contributing factors. And then the banks were instead of telling the world, look,
[Guest]: we made a mess of it. And it's in a bad shape. Because as I said, because of the fiscal deficit,
[Guest]: the government cannot be liberal in recapitalizing. And once you bear everything,
[Guest]: then your investors also will not be happy. So you keep on evergreening, find ways how not to
[Guest]: tell the world how bad is the situation till Raghuram Rajan took the ultimate step to expose it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we'll come to that. And just to sort of this passage on evergreening, which I think is a very
[Amit Varma]: sort of a lovely portrayal of how it happens. So I'll just read it out for the benefit of my
[Amit Varma]: listeners where you're right, quote, when a project got delayed, the banks approached an
[Amit Varma]: investment banker like SBI caps to create some room for fresh loans. This could be done through
[Amit Varma]: various creative means. In some cases, a sub project was created, or the original project
[Amit Varma]: was expanded, or a product line was added. The company setting up the project good, for example,
[Amit Varma]: by so called line balancing equipment to make it more viable and efficient. Let us say the new
[Amit Varma]: facility may need 300 crore, the cost can be padded up with frills like building improvement,
[Amit Varma]: retrofitting of equipment, repairs and other miscellaneous expenses, which are difficult to
[Amit Varma]: quantify, making it say 500 crore. Such practices were rampant in the power and steel sectors.
[Amit Varma]: Lenders sanctioned additional loans based on the investment bankers appraisal with nominal or zero
[Amit Varma]: equity infusion from the promoter. The lending banks claimed the new loan said the company
[Amit Varma]: service interest and installments and so prevented the entire exposure from becoming an NPA,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And it strikes me here that, you know, earlier we were talking about incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And even in past episodes that I have sort of done on banking and NPAs and all a long time back,
[Amit Varma]: we've spoken about how the incentives for PSBs and private banks are different, in the sense
[Amit Varma]: there is much more accountability in private banks, you know, they'll put a lot more effort
[Amit Varma]: into appraisals and all. But when it comes to something like Evergreen, it seems that the
[Amit Varma]: incentives are similar, if I may think aloud, because nobody wants to show bad loans on their
[Amit Varma]: books. And this is just a good way of, you know, making the books not look as bad as it were. So,
[Amit Varma]: by, you know, when this aspect comes, evergreening and what you, you later have a section on the
[Amit Varma]: creative restructuring, would you say that, you know, the incentives are perverse all the way
[Guest]: through? Yeah, actually, you have raised a very interesting point. If you look at the NPA,
[Guest]: overall NPA, you will find that public sector banks have far higher NPA than private banks.
[Guest]: But if you look at with a, look a little closely, you will find that, no, it's not exactly correct.
[Guest]: Yeah, as a group, they are, but there are some banks, which are almost negligible NPA,
[Guest]: because they don't get in there. Like, for instance, HDFC Bank and Kotak Bank,
[Guest]: they will not take exposure to that kind of areas. So, they won't have any NPA whatsoever
[Guest]: for that particular segment. But if you look at ICICI and Axis, those days, I'm talking about
[Guest]: 2014-15, you will find their NPA in that segment is comparable with public sector banks. So,
[Guest]: it's not only the public sector banks have gone wrong, those private sector banks, which were
[Guest]: betting big on the India story, infrastructure, they read the economic headwinds wrong,
[Guest]: they also got into trouble. And which is why this particular two banks in those days,
[Guest]: I'm talking about not now, ICICI and Axis Bank also have pretty, pretty high exposure to these
[Guest]: segments, which the public sector banks have. So, it's always, I mean, you have gone wrong
[Guest]: for multiple reasons, you have gone wrong. And then you try to find out how to do this and what
[Guest]: you read out some extract from the for the listeners. It's just the, it's a classic ever
[Guest]: grinning that I can't give you a loan for the same project. So, we figure out how to create
[Guest]: a sub project and give a loan. So, you are able to pay me back service the interest for the time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, and if I think aloud, I think the difference between private sector and public
[Amit Varma]: sector banks when it comes to giving the loan in the first place, you know, doing the due diligence
[Amit Varma]: and all that is that I think the private sector bank is equally likely to make an honest mistake
[Amit Varma]: where they get carried away by whatever the environment of the day, maybe the animal spirits
[Amit Varma]: or the irrational exuberance. But if you're looking at careless mistakes, or even malicious
[Amit Varma]: mistakes in the case of Foner loan scheme, those are more likely to come from the public sector
[Amit Varma]: banks. But when it comes to evergreening, for example, the incentives seem to me to be
[Guest]: pretty much similar. Would you agree with that? Yes, I would like to believe that. Yes. I mean,
[Guest]: we can't. Yeah, I would. But only I will just have little qualified that I think you are a little
[Guest]: unfair to the public sector probably that it's basically they are always under pressure to
[Guest]: fulfill certain targets. You know, they are the, as I said, it's a socio-political instrument.
[Guest]: It's all about target. So, yes, there could be some guys who are compromised. But by and large,
[Guest]: I find that it's not exactly the recklessness or carelessness. It's just under pressure,
[Guest]: you need to do things. And you have a very short tenure, you know, you have a very short tenure,
[Guest]: unlike say, where you have 10 years, 15 years, 20 years and kind of thing here, you just manage
[Guest]: somehow your two years or three years, you need to be not to be holed up by either the investigative
[Guest]: agency or by the government for not doing things, etc. So, that's how you end up doing. Of course,
[Guest]: now, what is happening is most of the bankers, they have understood that not doing things is
[Guest]: better than doing things, which is why the so called risk averseness or they're not giving
[Guest]: credit. They found that I will not be holed up for doing any miscreant or send to Arthur Road
[Guest]: jail if I don't do anything. So, doing nothing is better than doing something. So, they have
[Amit Varma]: gone to the other extreme. Yeah. And I must point out that I sounded judgmental about public sector
[Amit Varma]: banks earlier, but I was not being judgmental about people specifically, because everyone's
[Amit Varma]: responding to incentives. I was more being judgmental about structure and incentives and
[Amit Varma]: the way those work where you're more. Yes. Now, you've got, you know, these delightful
[Amit Varma]: descriptions of creative restructuring using things like EPBG export performance bank guarantee
[Amit Varma]: and SLBC standby letters of credit and, you know, securitization of future profit and all of it is
[Amit Varma]: great fun to read, but I'm not going to make you go through those here because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: let the listener sort of discover those stories. But, you know, in a section called confidence
[Amit Varma]: tricks, you have this fabulous story that I can't help reading out because I just loved it,
[Amit Varma]: where you write quote, in one such case, it was only after CBI officers entered the SBI caps
[Amit Varma]: office in cuff parade that SBI caps realized that it had been duped. Two senior employees of a
[Amit Varma]: public sector consulting firm had been involved in preparing a detailed project report for a sick
[Amit Varma]: large private sector steel company. But the pair had actually left the consulting firm long ago
[Amit Varma]: while doing the project appraisal. They were actually on the sick steel company's payroll,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And I found this hilarious because all they did was they use their old
[Amit Varma]: visiting cards when they visited and that was enough. Yes. Yes. So, so then these are all I'm
[Guest]: talking about the eye for detail or the granular story to make it interesting. You know, that's
[Guest]: what I care for while looking at the theory and doing things also. But these are all little things
[Guest]: which actually get you feel that, you know, make it more interesting. And that's the entire
[Amit Varma]: objective. I loved another phrase you used in that same chapter where you talk about
[Amit Varma]: hope banking and you write quote, the banks were living in hope in many troubled projects.
[Amit Varma]: I was ever greening with the banks, dispersing fresh loans to book artificial profits by
[Amit Varma]: recovering interest in previous loans, top quote, which we've discussed in a great example of that,
[Amit Varma]: which you point out is a 400 megawatts, three Maheshwar Heidel power corporation,
[Amit Varma]: which basically was conceived in 1992. It was a project on the Narmada, but it ran against
[Amit Varma]: the Narmada dam project and it never took off. But despite the fact that it didn't take off,
[Amit Varma]: it kept getting evergreen and evergreen and evergreen. And finally in April, 2020, the whole
[Amit Varma]: saga got over, which is quite such a remarkable kind of story where a project doesn't exist,
[Amit Varma]: but the loans are just getting, yeah, that's, that's hope. Yeah, that's, that's hope banking.
[Amit Varma]: Now your chapter about the war against NPAs is kind of fascinating where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Raghuram Rajan takes over at one point and obviously, you know, something has to be done.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how the thinking within the banking community and the regulatory
[Amit Varma]: community evolves about these loans and what should we do about them?
[Guest]: No, as you know, when Raghuram Rajan came in 2013, his object first, he got into,
[Guest]: it was sort of baptism by fire because you have NPA in double digits and you have current account
[Guest]: deficit historic high, higher than what it was in 1991, which forced India to open up the economy.
[Guest]: So on the first two front, he stabilized, you know, inflation genie was bottled
[Guest]: and current account deficit was taken care of. He organized, I would say arranged for flood of
[Guest]: foreign money to get into India, etc. And then he shifted his attention to the NPA and he figured
[Guest]: out that bankers are not telling the truth for multiple reasons, as I said, because they are
[Guest]: afraid that if you expose yourself, then you need to have a lot of capital to take care of your bad
[Guest]: assets, which capital was not forthcoming. And of course, how do investors approach you?
[Guest]: And then he figured out that the corporate India is actually taking the so-called crony capitalism.
[Guest]: Corporate India, many of the companies actually taking the banking system for a ride.
[Guest]: They are not bringing their own equity. It's actually bank debt that's there playing around.
[Guest]: So you need to do this. How do you do this? First, RBI instituted a called Crillic database
[Guest]: where the banks were said that all large account 50 crore plus, you have to give data to us. And
[Guest]: that made RBI sort of aware of the fact that things are not exactly correct the way it should
[Guest]: the way it should have gone, because one particular entity is bad and one bank's book and good at
[Guest]: another bank book. How can that be? It's not possible. So RBI got a sense that things are not
[Guest]: correct. And then RBI launched the first of its kind globally, I would say, asset quality review,
[Guest]: AQR. And what is this? Basically, I am Reserve Bank of India. You are a bank. I don't trust you.
[Guest]: I don't trust your auditor. I will send my team to audit and figure out how it is going.
[Guest]: And so the teams were created and it is real like a Scotland yard operation.
[Guest]: I gave a graphic description. It was not operated from the central bank. I mean,
[Guest]: central office of Reserve Bank of India from the Saeed Bhagat Singh Mark Fort.
[Guest]: It was actually away from the public glare from the fort office. So there are teams were formed
[Guest]: depending on the profile of the banks, the team was formed, how senior people will be there,
[Guest]: how many will be there. They went there and they started finding out how things were right or
[Guest]: how things were wrong. And it was a real time sort of coverage to see what's going.
[Guest]: And just to give an example, one inspector, RBI inspector finds that one particular loan in a
[Guest]: bank's book, it's still not paid on the say 88 or 89 days and on 90 days it will turn bad. So the
[Guest]: particular RBI inspector checks with the CEO says that, look, this is going to be bad.
[Guest]: What are you going to do? It's only 48 hours or 24 hours left. And the bank CEO told the person
[Guest]: that, look, don't worry. We have seen this entity. Typically it pays on the last day.
[Guest]: And look, on the last day, the money actually came. And the inspector was very happy that
[Guest]: here is a banker who actually tells the truth and knows what exactly happened.
[Guest]: And the account did not turn bad. But then just out of curiosity, he started digging it
[Guest]: and found out the money came on the 90th day, this bank, but it left and it gone to another bank.
[Guest]: And for that bank, the 90th day was actually two days later. So what was happening? A group of
[Guest]: banks come together and sanction a loan, but the disbursement happens on different days.
[Guest]: So A's 90th day is different from B's 90th day. It's different from C's 90th day. And same money,
[Guest]: you would call it round tripping, you know, comes to the bank and makes it good on 90th day,
[Guest]: leaves and makes a good 90th day of the second bank and leaves and goes to the third bank.
[Guest]: So that's how the entire thing was exposed. And then there was a series of meeting between the
[Guest]: bankers and RBI. Bankers put up a strong lobby and there were various other lobby groups to
[Guest]: impress on Reserve Bank of India that this is unfair. It cannot be done. The banking sector
[Guest]: would collapse. But RBI was not convinced. The question was how much time would be given to the
[Guest]: bankers to come up clean. And I think after a series of meetings, when they were convinced
[Guest]: that yes, things were not correct, I mentioned graphically, a team led by governor and the
[Guest]: deputy governors, they met and they left for Delhi, met the finance minister and convinced
[Guest]: the finance minister that this job has to be done. And then the very next day, the finance minister
[Guest]: issued a release how it's done. And of course, they convinced the finance minister also to come
[Guest]: up with a massive 2 trillion plus recapitalization fund. So all these things had at this almost
[Guest]: simultaneously. And it was decided that banks were given six quarters, which is between December
[Guest]: 2015 and March 2017, they would come up clean. And if you look at the data, those days, you will
[Guest]: find that till September 2015, the banks NPA were like 2%, 3%, 4%, etc. But during those six quarters,
[Guest]: they hit the roof. And ultimately we found like say IOB, Indian Overseas Bank and IDBI Bank and
[Guest]: Yuko Bank, at least the three banks I remember, the NPA shot off to close to 30%,
[Guest]: probably 10 times bigger than all. So, what RBI did is this first six quarters, you start cleaning
[Guest]: up. And then RBI also forced them to come up to tell the world to tell SEBI, etc. If a bank's
[Guest]: understanding of NPA and appreciation of NPA, that is the calculation of NPA was different from
[Guest]: Reserve Bank of India's calculation of NPA. So, you would find that like S Bank is a case
[Guest]: or Axis Bank or even ICICI and many other banks in public sector too, they had to regularly come
[Guest]: up and tell the SEBI and others, look, we calculated much less, we under provided.
[Guest]: Had we done the right kind of provision, then our net profit would have come down. Or in some cases,
[Guest]: they would have actually ended up making losses and the NPA would have gone much higher. So,
[Guest]: that's the war against NPA. And simultaneously, of course, in a record time, the government of
[Guest]: India put in place IBC. Pranam Mukherjee, I think President signed it off on August 10,
[Guest]: August 2016, if I'm not mistaken, and by December, it was up and running. So, you have IBC.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a bankruptcy code.
[Guest]: Which is a bankruptcy, yes, the bankruptcy code. And you have the entire,
[Guest]: actually you strip the banks naked. You know, that's what, that's what happened.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So, you know, you'd mentioned in the break that you were a poet and you wrote Bengali poems,
[Amit Varma]: and you'd also mentioned that maybe you'd like to write a novel someday or a film script.
[Amit Varma]: And since you mentioned film script, you know, there are parts in your book,
[Amit Varma]: which are so beautifully described that they should really be in a web series.
[Amit Varma]: So, if someone in like the OTT business is listening, kindly get in touch with Tamal Da and
[Amit Varma]: hire him for the job. I want to read out one particular scene that you've described
[Amit Varma]: about the asset quality review team, the AQR team, how they are at the, what they're doing
[Amit Varma]: at the Cuff Parade office, where you write, the AQR team was like a financial bum disposal squad,
[Amit Varma]: trying to dispuse explosives, which could destroy the depositors trust, the bedrock of banking.
[Amit Varma]: A control room was set up on the third floor of RBI's Cuff Parade office,
[Amit Varma]: away from his central office and Mint Road. Two general managers were collating the real
[Amit Varma]: time data. A third general manager was consolidating them under different heads.
[Amit Varma]: And a fourth one was looking at the big picture on the computer screen.
[Amit Varma]: The chief general manager in charge of DBS was heading the control room. For six months,
[Amit Varma]: the team hardly slept. All of them worked flat out, even over the weekends. Every evening,
[Amit Varma]: the Cuff Parade team would come over to the central office to take stock of the situation.
[Amit Varma]: Over poha and coffee from the canteen, the meetings would carry on till at least 10pm.
[Amit Varma]: But quite often, there would be calls at midnight or later from senior colleagues who stayed tuned
[Amit Varma]: in 24-7. Slowly, the big picture emerged, stop quote, which is incredible. And the date,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the little details, like poha and coffee from the canteen and all of that are
[Amit Varma]: what give it so much life. And you also describe the weird things that they find here,
[Amit Varma]: like they find that a huge sum of money has been deployed for oil and gas exploration.
[Amit Varma]: But then they just do a Google search. And they find that the oil fields that is supposedly being
[Amit Varma]: funded has already been identified as dry. So there is nothing there, clearly a scam.
[Amit Varma]: Then you talk about another scam where they use the SBLC, standby letters of credit,
[Amit Varma]: and you know, a guarantee on one bank causes another bank to lend. And the RBI finds these
[Amit Varma]: are being used as chain letters, where you write quote, Bank A was giving money based on a guarantee
[Amit Varma]: by Bank B, and then it was passed on to Bank C, D, E, and F, and so on, stop quote. And the amount
[Amit Varma]: of creativity that the banks and whoever they've given the loans to is like, like incredible.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, in the book, you've described much more of it. I've just taken these selected
[Amit Varma]: excerpts. But do you ever find yourself admiring the creativity and ingenuity of these guys who are
[Amit Varma]: just, you know, and at the end of the day, this is the system they are in, and they're making
[Guest]: the most of it? Yeah, but cracking the code also,
[Guest]: you have to find that it was equally difficult. So I think, yeah, many find fault with Reserve
[Guest]: Bank of India, not exactly a great regulator when it comes to inspection and supervision,
[Guest]: not getting into any controversy or debate, but it was not easy, I must say, because it was not
[Guest]: in isolation, it's the entire system was working on it. It was, you know, on the one hand,
[Guest]: you have the crony capitalism, the crony capitalists, they are taking the advantage of
[Guest]: this. On the other hand, the large part of the banking system was trying to rig it to protect
[Guest]: their balance sheets. So it was pretty, pretty bad, difficult. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And yet there are these teams of people doing heroic things. Now, another interesting layer
[Amit Varma]: that you've kind of explored is the action that then, you know, Raghuram Rajan and his
[Amit Varma]: successors took, where you have explored the possibility that they might have gone from
[Amit Varma]: first gear to fifth gear in the words that you use. And, you know, there was, there were contrary
[Amit Varma]: point of views from within the RBI itself that let's give them more time, let's not try to do
[Amit Varma]: it in these many quarters, it won't happen. So suddenly, tell me a little about that and
[Guest]: what were the sort of arguments? You know, what I wanted to say,
[Guest]: and I found out from my research and interaction, this book is actually based on hundreds and
[Guest]: hundreds of interviews. I've got four governors on record, but I have probably made 40 central
[Guest]: bankers, if not more, off record and others also. So there are within Reserve Bank of India,
[Guest]: there is no unanimity on what would be. Yes, bankers were evergreening, they are not
[Guest]: coming out clean. Yes, there was too much of bad loan. But then how do we, what is the way forward?
[Guest]: Remember, IBC came later, before IBC, this happened. Now, had there been IBC before,
[Guest]: and then you move and you attack the banking system and force them to come clean, that's a
[Guest]: separate story. It started in 2015, IBC came in one year later. So then the discussions were,
[Guest]: I think Mr. Mundra was deputy governor in charge of bank, this particular segment there and all.
[Guest]: He was also not exactly fond of the idea of six quarters. I think within RBI, there were
[Guest]: different versions that we need to give them more time. And in that context only, I said that it's
[Guest]: from first gear to fifth gear, that all along you are keeping your eyes closed,
[Guest]: you allowed them to restructure, to evergreen their balance sheets and you look the other way,
[Guest]: and they had a good time. And now suddenly you tell them that within six quarters,
[Guest]: they have to come up clean. Is this the right approach or should you have given them eight
[Guest]: quarters or probably even more? Because IBC was not there, IBC came later. So these are the
[Guest]: internal debate RBI had within itself at the top echelon. But finally, Dr. Raghuram Rajan's,
[Guest]: I think decision prevailed, enough is enough, six quarters is enough. That's what has happened.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's easier said, but those days, what I understand, because what I wrote is what I could
[Guest]: write. But there are many things I could not write, but I am aware of things happen. So it's
[Guest]: not that easy. Actually, there are heated debate, lobbying, counter lobbying, how to go about it.
[Guest]: And there was interaction between ministry, Reserve Bank, within Reserve Bank of India also,
[Guest]: there are different opinions, etc. So it was pretty exciting time, I would say, in a positive
[Amit Varma]: sense. Incredibly fascinating. You know, I've taken a lot of your time. So I'll sort of briefly
[Amit Varma]: first for the listeners, what the book contains. This is, you know, we've discussed a very,
[Amit Varma]: very small part of the book. There's also chapters on the NBFC crisis with ILNFS and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Tamal's written about rating agencies as a big section on public sector banks,
[Amit Varma]: all that is wrong with them, how can we fix them? There's a fantastically entertaining section,
[Amit Varma]: which reads like a thriller on fraud within the banking system, including colorful characters
[Amit Varma]: like Gokulnath Shetty, a deputy manager at PNB, who is responsible for a $2 billion fraud,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which is part of the whole Nirav Modi scam. You've, you know, written in detail about
[Amit Varma]: Kingfisher, what happened there, you've written about Chanda Kochar and so on. And I'll just
[Amit Varma]: direct all the listeners to go ahead and read the book, because it's a wonderfully clear
[Amit Varma]: explanation of this enormous crisis, which is upon us. And obviously, from the show notes,
[Amit Varma]: I'll also link my previous episodes on this subject. You know, you've given me a lot of
[Amit Varma]: your time. So I won't keep you much longer. Broader questions that, you know, we've seen a
[Amit Varma]: couple of broad sort of storylines, as it were emerged out of this. One is that there is a
[Amit Varma]: system which is structurally warped, the incentives are crazy, and people are exploiting that and all
[Amit Varma]: these incredibly intricate scams are happening. On the other hand, you also have groups of dedicated
[Amit Varma]: civil servants and outside economists and all that, who are working to fix a problem,
[Amit Varma]: whether it's ideating or whether it is the almost the CBI kind of operation that the,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the AQR team did, all of that is happening. When you look at the present moment
[Amit Varma]: in time, you know, do you feel more hopeful or disheartened? And also going forward, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what do you think about the banking sector? Do you think is reforming? Do you think is reforming,
[Amit Varma]: but too slowly? Do you think that reform is, you know, not happening at all? And it's a problem?
[Guest]: What's that broad takeaway of yours from this? Well, it's actually a very leading question. I
[Guest]: mean, let me quickly tell you, had we been talking one year before in February 2020, you and me,
[Guest]: this discussion, my take would have been slightly different, not slightly, very different than what
[Guest]: it is now. As we are approaching the financial year end last year, that is January, February,
[Guest]: February, many of us, a person like me who tracks the system was thinking that
[Guest]: there is some light at the end of the tunnel. Because yes, there was fight, there was a big
[Guest]: purge, cleanup, bad loans. But the first phase, which is the recognition of bad loans is almost
[Guest]: over. And we are getting into the recovery phase. What I mean is this, under pressure from Reserve
[Guest]: Bank of India, and their own understanding and their own compulsion, they were coming up clean.
[Guest]: I mean, as I said that RBI stripped them naked. So, we thought that that phase is over. Now,
[Guest]: they will start recovering their money because IBC again, insolvency code in record time India
[Guest]: set it up. But there are many complexities, it is not been a smooth sailing, because corporate
[Guest]: India again, the crony capitalism, they go to the judiciary, they go to high court, they go to
[Guest]: Supreme Court, they find ways what is to game the system. I mean, you cannot change them.
[Guest]: So, IBC has not been working as well as we thought, but it is going, we are going there.
[Guest]: Globally, it happens, you cannot overnight change things. But apart from IBC working itself,
[Guest]: but as one part of it, the other part of it is the bankers started using IBC as a threat.
[Guest]: So, the corporate captains were actually staying away from the bankers, running away from the
[Guest]: bankers, they were coming back to the discussion table, and they were, which was not the case
[Guest]: earlier. So, the bankers are, it is advantage bankers, because you are running the risk of
[Guest]: losing your empire. So, you are no more running away and escaping the bankers, you are coming and
[Guest]: discussion table. So, IBC per se may not be extremely useful, but the threat of IBC was
[Guest]: useful. And in the past few years, most of the banks have done a lot of provisioning,
[Guest]: they set aside money for their bad loans. So, when they start recovering the bad loans,
[Guest]: they will, what you call technically in the money, because you have already provided for,
[Guest]: so the money comes, it adds to the balance sheet, it adds to the profitability.
[Guest]: So, by January, February, one year before, we thought first phase, bad loan recognition is over,
[Guest]: second phase, we will gain steam now, the recovery of bad loans, and once the recovery thing,
[Guest]: their balance sheet will get stronger, and they will come back to the credit path, credit growth
[Guest]: path. Aside, they have learned their lessons, bankers will not do the mistake anymore.
[Guest]: And the kind of political pressure and phone banking, I think there could be always pressure
[Guest]: to give money to MSMEs and certain segments and all, but industry, there could be pressure to
[Guest]: give money to certain industries, but I do not think there is any pressure to give money to
[Guest]: industrialists as such. Some maybe still use their clout in a different way, but I would say that
[Guest]: I would say that phone banking, etc., is history now. So, things are pretty good. But now,
[Guest]: COVID has changed the scenario again. And we found that moratorium, which is 3 months from
[Guest]: there to 6 months, then we found Supreme Court coming in, so on and so forth. And while the
[Guest]: bankers are saying that our collection efficiency has gone up to 97, 98%, we are pretty good,
[Guest]: but we have seen the Reserve Bank of India has said it is half yearly, the health check,
[Guest]: the reports, last report said that actually by September, the next year, September the
[Guest]: bad loan can be doubled. So, RBI, I would give it a credit to RBI, it is pretty frank
[Guest]: in its assessment that bad loans can go up. So, what is the scenario now? It is pretty opaque,
[Guest]: I do not have the answer, because I am taking the bankers at a face value, I am not convinced about
[Guest]: the what the banker says. We need to wait after this, how much to what extent the bad loan will
[Guest]: come back, will it continue to haunt us, or it is not as bad. And if we go by bankers, what the
[Guest]: bankers are saying that things are not very bad. So, if we take RBI, what RBI is saying, things
[Guest]: will get worse. If we believe the bankers, things are not as bad as RBI is projecting.
[Guest]: That is the bad loan front. About the structural issues, I think the bankers have learned,
[Guest]: they have gone through a hell. They will not make the same mistakes again. So, they are a chastised
[Guest]: lot for whatever pressure, etc., and other things they have gone through now. And as I said, the
[Guest]: book spoke about the kind of pressure from investigative agencies, etc., they have gone
[Guest]: through. I think the bankers are gone to the other extreme, they are becoming risk averse,
[Guest]: they are not willing to lend, so on and so forth. But those kind of evergreening and doing a favor
[Guest]: to corporate India and doing things blindly, I do not think that is going to happen anymore.
[Guest]: And the third piece of it, the entire thing can be done different way. I think by announcing
[Guest]: two banks to be privatized, two public sector banks, by giving a Sikh Lakshmi Vilas bank to
[Guest]: a foreign bank, of course, India substituted a foreign bank. So, these changes we are seeing
[Guest]: from Reserve Bank of India and from the government of India. Earlier it was an
[Guest]: anathema that any foreign entity will pick up a local bank. Yes, DBS's India
[Guest]: Incorporated subsidiary is taking, but still it is a foreign bank subsidiary. It has been
[Guest]: allowed to take over a local bank. It is under litigation now, but hopefully it will go,
[Guest]: it will come up, it will go to the DBS. And similarly, the government has spoken about,
[Guest]: budget has spoken about two banks being privatized. So, I think the structural
[Guest]: infirmities now being addressed. We have a proactive regulator and we have a government
[Guest]: who has realized that for long we have been talking about now let us work the talk.
[Guest]: So, overall, if you ask me, I am hopeful. Barring the impact of COVID, who is telling the truth,
[Guest]: is RBI assessment correct or the bankers assessment correct, we need to figure out.
[Guest]: But structural issues are being addressed. Bankers have learned their lessons.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the worst is behind us. Yeah, that's a great summation. And it
[Amit Varma]: kind of struck me that what was going wrong was going wrong at two levels. And at one level,
[Amit Varma]: which is a sort of a micro level, things got fixed in the sense you had greater accountability,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of these lacuna, which banks and crony capitalists were able to exploit have been
[Amit Varma]: done away with. But to me, the more important layer was a broad structural layer, which gives
[Amit Varma]: us big incentives. And like you said, there is progress on that as well, with the privatization
[Amit Varma]: happening and all of that. So yeah, so on that note of hope, and by the way, you mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: I think, the criminal investigations into all of this. And I should point out to my listeners that
[Amit Varma]: there are a few scenes in your book, which are set in Arthur Road jail as well. And there's a
[Amit Varma]: lot happening. So kindly, you know, this is totally web series material. But Tamal, I have to thank
[Amit Varma]: you again for being so kind and giving me so much of your time and sharing your insights.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. I'm very impressed the way you have read the book. Not too many reviewers or not
[Guest]: too many interviewers have done this kind of homework. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: And be careful how you spend your money.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.